Eusebius, Church History III.24.17 and III.25.1-7 (NPNF2 vol.1, tr. A.C. McGiffert), https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/250103.htm

16. So much for our own account of these things. But in a more fitting place we shall attempt to show by quotations from the ancients, what others have said concerning them.

17. But of the writings of John, not only his Gospel, but also the former of his epistles, has been accepted without dispute both now and in ancient times.  But the other two are disputed. 

18. In regard to the Apocalypse, the opinions of most men are still divided.  But at the proper time this question likewise shall be decided from the testimony of the ancients. 

Chapter 25. The Divine Scriptures that are accepted and those that are not. 

1. Since we are dealing with this subject it is proper to sum up the writings of the New Testament which have been already mentioned. First then must be put the holy quaternion of the Gospels;  following them the Acts of the Apostles. 

2. After this must be reckoned the epistles of Paul;  next in order the extant former epistle of John,  and likewise the epistle of Peter,  must be maintained.  After them is to be placed, if it really seem proper, the Apocalypse of John,  concerning which we shall give the different opinions at the proper time.  These then belong among the accepted writings. 

3. Among the disputed writings,  which are nevertheless recognized  by many, are extant the so-called epistle of James  and that of Jude,  also the second epistle of Peter,  and those that are called the second and third of John,  whether they belong to the evangelist or to another person of the same name.

4. Among the rejected writings  must be reckoned also the Acts of Paul,  and the so-called Shepherd,  and the Apocalypse of Peter,  and in addition to these the extant epistle of Barnabas,  and the so-called Teachings of the Apostles;  and besides, as I said, the Apocalypse of John, if it seem proper, which some, as I said, reject,  but which others class with the accepted books. 

5. And among these some have placed also the Gospel according to the Hebrews,  with which those of the Hebrews that have accepted Christ are especially delighted. And all these may be reckoned among the disputed books. 

6. But we have nevertheless felt compelled to give a catalogue of these also, distinguishing those works which according to ecclesiastical tradition are true and genuine and commonly accepted,  from those others which, although not canonical but disputed,  are yet at the same time known to most ecclesiastical writers — we have felt compelled to give this catalogue in order that we might be able to know both these works and those that are cited by the heretics under the name of the apostles, including, for instance, such books as the Gospels of Peter,  of Thomas,  of Matthias,  or of any others besides them, and the Acts of Andrew  and John  and the other apostles, which no one belonging to the succession of ecclesiastical writers has deemed worthy of mention in his writings.

7. And further, the character of the style is at variance with apostolic usage, and both the thoughts and the purpose of the things that are related in them are so completely out of accord with true orthodoxy that they clearly show themselves to be the fictions of heretics.  Wherefore they are not to be placed even among the rejected writings,  but are all of them to be cast aside as absurd and impious.
