
iii. Placey Date and Contents, 

We can do no more than frame probable hjrpotheses with re- 
gard to place and date. The Epistle itself gives us vague out- 
lines ; and these outlines are all that is certain. But it will give 
reality and life to the letter if we fill in these outlines with 
details which may be true, which are probably like the truth, and 
which though confessedly conjectural make the drift of the letter 
more intelligible. 

The Apostle, towards the close of his life — ^for the letter pre- 
supposes both Gospel and First Epistle — ^has been engaged 
upon his usual work of supervision and direction among the 



Digitized by 



Google 



THIRD EPISTLE. 59 

Churches of Asia, In the course of it he has seen some children 
of the lady to whom the letter is addressed, and has found that 
they are living Christian lives, steadfast in the faith. But there 
are other members of her family of whom this cannot be said. 
And on his return to Ephesus the Apostle, in expressing his joy 
respecting the faithful children, conveys a warning respecting 
their less steadfast brothers. * Has their mother been as watch- 
ful as she might have been to keep them from pernicious in- 
fluences ? Her hospitality must be exercised with discretion ; 
for her guests may contaminate her household. There is no 
real progress in advancing beyond the limits of Christian truth. 
There is no real charity in helping workers of evil to work suc- 
cessfully. On his next Apostolic journey he hopes to see her.' 
Near the Apostle's abode are some nephews of the lady ad- 
dressed, but their mother, her sister, is dead, or is living else- 
where. These nephews send their greeting in his letter, and 
thus shew that they share his loving anxiety respecting the 
elect lady's household. It was very possibly from them that he 
had heard that all was not well there. 
The letter may be subdivided thus : 

I — 3. Address and Oreetlii^. 

4—1 1. Main Body of the l^lstle. 

I. Occasion of the Letter (». 4). 

«. Exhortation to Love and Obedience (5, 6). 

3. Warnings against False Doctrine (7 — 9). 

4. Warnings against False Charity (10, 11). 
12, 13. Conclusion. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE THIRD EPISTLE. 

In this we have another sample of the private correspondence 
of an Apostle. For beyond all question, whatever we may think 
of the Second Epistle, this letter is addressed to an individual. 
And it is not an official letter^ like the Epistles to Timothy and 

Digitized by LnOOglC 



6o INTRODUCTION. 



Titus, but a private one, like that to Philemon. While the 
Second Epistle is mainly one of warning, the Third is one of 
encouragement. As in the former case, we are conscious of the 
writer's authority in the tone of the letter ; which, however, is 
friendly rather than official 

i. The Authorship of the Epistle, 

On this point very little need be added to what has been 
said respecting the authorship of the Second Epistle. The two 
Epistles are universally admitted to be by one and the same 
person. But it must be pointed out that, if the Second Epistle 
did not exist, the claims of the Third to be Apostolic would be 
more disputable. Neither the external nor the internal evidence 
is so strongly in its favour. It is neither quoted nor mentioned 
so early or so frequently as the Second. It is not nearly so 
closely akin to the First Epistle and the Gospel. It labours 
under the difficulty involved in the conduct of Diotrephes : for 
it must be admitted that " there is something astonishing in the 
notion that the prominent Christian Presbyter of an Asiatic 
Church should not only repudiate the authority of St John, and 
not only refuse to receive his travelling missionary, and prevent 
others from doing so, but should even excommunicate or try to 
excommunicate those who did so" (Farrar). Nevertheless, it is 
impossible to separate these two twin letters, and assign them to 
different authors. And, as has been seen already, the balance 
of evidence, both external and internal, strongly favours the 
Apostolicity of the Second ; and this, notwithstanding the diffi- 
culty about Diotrephes, carries with it the Apostolicity of the 
Third. 

ii. The Person Addressed, 

The name Gaius was so common throughout the Roman 
Empire that to identify any person of this name with any other 
of the same name requires specially clear evidence. In N.T. 
there are probably at least three Christians who are thus called. 

Digitized by LnOOglC 



THIRD EPISTLE. 6i 



1. Gaius of Corintk, in whose house S. Paul was staying when 
he wrote the Epistle to the Romans (Rom. xvi. 23), who is 
probably the same as he whom S. Paul baptized (i Cor. i. 14). 

2. Gaius of Macedonia^ who was S. Paul's travelling-companion 
at the time of the uproar at Ephesus, and was seized by the mob 
(Acts xix. 29). 3. Gaius of Derbe^ who with Timothy and 
others left Greece before S. Paul and waited for him at Troas 
(Acts XX. 4, 5). But these three may be reduced to two, for i 
and 3 may possibly be the same person. It is possible, but 
nothing more, that the Gaius of our Epistle maybe one of these. 
Origen says that the first of these three became Bishop of Thes- 
salonica. The Apostolical Constitutions (vii. 46) mention a 
Gaius, Bishop of Pergamos, and the context implies that he was 
the first Bishop, or at least one of the earliest Bishops, of that 
city. Here again we can only say that he may be the Gaius of 
S. John. The Epistle leaves us in doubt whether Gaius is at this 
time a Presbyter or not. Apparently he is a well-to-do layman. 

iii. Place^ Date^ and Contents, 

The place may with probability be supposed to be Ephesus : 
the letter has the tone of being written from head-quarters. Its 
strong resemblance, especially in its opening and conclusion, 
inclines us to believe that it was written about the same time as 
the Second Epistle, i.e. after the Gospel and First Epistle, and 
therefore towards the end of S. John's life. The unwillingness 
to write a long letter which appears in both Epistles (z/v. 12, 13) 
would be natural in an old man to whom correspondence is a 
burden. 

The contents speak for themselves. Gaius is commended 
for his hospitality, in which he resembles his namesake of 
Corinth (Rom. xvi. 23) ; is warned against imitating the factious 
and intolerant Diotrephes ; and in contrast to him is told of the 
excellence of Demetrius, who is perhaps the bearer of the letter. 
In his next Apostolic journey S. John hopes to visit him. Mean- 
while he and *the friends' with him send a salutation to Gaius 
and 'the friends' with him. 

Digitized by LjOOQIC 



62 INTRODUCTION. 



The Epistle may be thus analysed. 
I. Address. 
3—12. Mala Body oC the Epistle. 

I. Personal Good Wishes and Sentiments (2 — ^4). 

a. Gains commended for his Hospitality (5 — 8). 

3. Diotrephes condemned for his Hostility (9, 10). 

4. The Moral (11, 12). 
13, 14. Coxufluslon. 

"The Second and Third Epistles of S. John occupy their 
own place in the sacred Canon, and contribute their own 
peculiar element to the stock of Christian truth and practice. 
They lead us from the region of miracle and prophecy, out of an 
atmosphere charged with the supernatural, to the more average 
every-day life of Christendom, with its regular paths and unex- 
citing air. There is no hint in these short notes of extraordinary 
charismata. The tone of their Christianity is deep, earnest, 
severe, devout, but has the quiet of the Christian Church 
and home very much as at present constituted. The re- 
ligion which pervades them is simple, unexaggerated, and 
practical. The writer is grave and reserved. Evidently in the 
possession of the fulness of the Christian faith, he is content to 
rest upon it with a calm consciousness of strength.... By the con- 
ception of the Incarnate Lord, the Creator and Light of all men, 
and of the universality of Redemption, which the Gospel and 
the First Epistle did so much to bring home to all who received 
Christ, germs were deposited in the soil of Christianity which 
necessarily grew from an abstract idea into the great reality of 
the Catholic Church. In these two short occasional letters 
S. John provided two safeguards for that great institution. 
Heresy and schism are the dangers to which it is perpetually ex- 
posed. St John's condemnation of the spirit of heresy is re- 
corded in the Second Epistle; his condemnation of the spirit of 
schism is written in the Third Epistle. Every age of Christendom 
up to the present has rather exaggerated than dwarfed the sig- 
nificance of this condemnation" (Bishop Alexander). 



Digitized by 



Google 



GREEK TEXT. 63 
