THE SECOND AND THIRD EPISTLES. 


1. TEXT, 


ΤῊΕ authorities for the text of the Epistles are enumerated in Authori- 
the Introduction to the first Epistle, § 1 (including the MSS. vet 
SAB(C)KLP). The text of Cod. Ephr. (C) is preserved for the 
third Epistle from v. 3—end. 


The variations from the text of Stephens (1550) which I have Variations 


P δ from 
adopted are set down in the following table : Stephens, 
1550- 
Tue Srconp EPISTLE. a Jon. 


om. Κυρίου, ‘Jesus Christ’ (AB), for ‘the Lord Jesus Christ.’ 
γράφων for γράφω (apparently an error). 


3 
5 
6 αὕτη ἡ ἐντολή ἐστιν (AB), for αὕτη ἐστὶν 7 ἐντολή. 
7 ἐξῆλθαν, are gone forth (NAB), for εἰσῆλθον, are entered. 
8 ἀπολέσητε, ye lose (X°AB), for ἀπολέσωμεν, we lose. 
ἀπολάβητε, ye receive (NAB), for ἀπολάβωμεν, we receive. 
9 προάγων, goeth onward (NAB), for παραβαίνων, transgresseth. 
om. τοῦ χριστοῦ (2°), ‘the teaching’ (NAB), for ‘the teaching of 
the Christ.’ 
II 6 λέγων γάρ (NAB), for ὁ γὰρ λέγων. 
12 γενέσθαι (NAB), for ἐλθεῖν. 
ὑμῶν (probably) (AB), for ἡμῶν. 
πεπληρωμένη ἡ (SB), for ἦ πεπληρωμένη. 
13 om. ᾿Αμήν (NAB). 
THe TuirD EPIsTLe. 3 Joun. 
4 χάριν (probably), favour (B), for χαράν, joy. 
év+ τῇ ἀληθείᾳ (ABC*), ‘in the truth,’ for ‘in truth.’ 
5 τοῦτο, this (4. ΒΟ), for εἰς τούς, to the. 
7 ἐθνικῶν (RABC), for ἐθνῶν. 


lit TEXT. 


8 ὑπολαμβάνειν (NABC*), to welcome, tor ἀπολαμβάτειν, to receive. 
9 ἔγραψά - τι΄ (ΔΑ ΒΟ), ‘I wrote somewhat,’ for ‘1 wrote.’ 
11 om. δέ, but (NABC). 
12 οἶδας, thow knowest (Δ ΒΟ), for οἴδατε, ye know. 
13 γράψαι σοι for γράφειν (NABC). 
γράφειν for γράψαι ( Δ. ΒΟ). 
14 σὲ ἰδεῖν for ἰδεῖν σε (ABC). 
The text The text of B maintains the first place as before. It has only 
es one error in 2 John, the omission of τοῦ before πατρός in τ΄. 4; and 
one error in 3 John, ἔγραψας for ἔγραψα in v. 9, in addition to two 
faults of writing, paprvpovy for μαρτυρούντων, v. 3 (at the end of a 


line), and ov for ous, τ. 6. 


The text The text of δὲ has numerous errors and false readings : 
of δ, 
2Jonx. THe Seconp EpIstie. 


3 ἀπὸ θεοῦ...καὶ I. X. x*. 

+ αὐτοῦ΄ τοῦ πατρός, N* corr. N. 
4 ἔλαβον. 
ἀλλ᾽ + ἐντολὴν΄ ἦν. 


on 


6 ἡ ἐντολὴ + αὐτοῦ΄. 
περιπατήσητε. 
7 om. 6’ ἀντίχριστος. 
8 ἀπόλησθε 8* corr. NS. 
12 ἔχω N* A*, 
στόμα - τι΄ N*. 
Joux. Tue Tuirp EPIstLe. 
8 ἐκκλησίᾳ for ἀληθείᾳ δι ἢ (so A). 
10 om. ἐκ. 


" 
15 ασπασαι. 


The text There are, as in the first Epistle, many peculiar readings in A, 
of - : ὑὸς 
a some found also in the Latin Vulgate : 
2Jonn. Tue Srconp EpIste. 
3 ᾽ Ν ΄ 
I οὐκ ἐγὼ δέ, 
2 ἐνοικοῦσαν for μένουσαν. 


3 om. ἔσται μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν. 


TEXT. ΠῚ 


4 ἀπό ἴον παρα. 
9 τὸν υἱὸν καὶ τὸν πατέρα Ve. 
12 γράψαι. 
ἐλπίζω yap vg. 
THe Tuirp EPpIstLe. 3 Joux. 
om. ov. 
5 ἐργάζῃ. 
8 ἐκκλησίᾳ (so δὲ ἢ). 
Io ἄν. 
13 οὐκ ἐβουλήθην. 
(15 οἱ ἀδελφοῦ). 
There is also an unusual number of peculiar readings in the The text 
part of the third Epistle preserved in C: le 
4 τούτων χαρὰν οὐκ ἔχω. 
6 ποιήσας προπέμψεις. 
7 ἐθνικῶν om. τῶν. 
10 φλυαρώῶν εἰς ἡμᾶς. 
(ἐπιδεχομένους). 
12 ὑπὸ αὐτῆς τῆς ἐκκλησίας καὶ τῆς ἀληθείας. 


The readings of the Latin Vulgate do not offer anything of The text 
of the 


special interest : Latin Vul- 
ate. 
THE Second EPistLe. steak 
3 Sit nobiscum (vobiscum) gratia. 
a Christo Jesu. 
Tue Tuirp Epist ye. 3 Joun. 


4 majorem horum non habeo gratiam. 
5 et hoc in. 
9 scripsissem forsitan. 
Some Latin copies have a singular addition after 2 John τα: 


ecce prodixi vobis ne in diem domini condemnemint. 


II. AUTHORSHIP. 


The second and third Epistles of St John are reckoned by These 
: Epistl 
Eusebius among ‘the controverted books’ in the same rank as the id 


liv 


among 
‘the con- 
troverted 
Books.’ 


External 
evidence. 


The title 
‘the El- 
der’ likely 
to create 
confusion. 


AUTHORSHIP. 


Epistles of St James, St Jude and 2 Peter’, ‘as well known and 
recognised by most.’ He does not give the authority or the exact 
ground of the doubt, but states the question generally as being 
‘whether they belong to the Evangelist, or possibly to another of 
the same name”.’ 

The Epistles are not contained in the Peshito Syriac Version, 
nor are they accepted by the Syrian Church. Origen was aware 
that ‘all did not allow them to be genuine’®.’ There is however no 
other ante-Nicene evidence against their authenticity. They are 
noticed as ‘received in the Catholic Church’ in the Muratorian 
Canon. This at least appears to be the most probable explanation of 
the clause. Comp. Hist. of N. 7. Canon, p. 537. They were included 
in the Old Latin Version. Clement of Alexandria wrote short notes 
upon them*. TIrenzus quotes the second Epistle as St John’s, and 
once quotes a phrase from it as from the first Epistle’. There are 
no quotations from either of the Epistles in Origen, Tertullian, or 
Cyprian, but Dionysius of Alexandria clearly recognises them as the 
works of St John; and Aurelius, an African Bishop, quoted the 
second Epistle as ‘St John’s Epistle’ at a Council where Cyprian 
was present. 

It is not dificult to explain the doubt as to their authorship, 
which was felt by some. They probably had a very limited circula- 
tion from their personal (or narrow) destination. When they were 
carried abroad under the name of John, the title of ‘the elder’ was 
not unlikely to mislead the readers. Papias had spoken of ‘an 
elder John’; and so it was natural to suppose that the John who 
so styled himself in the Epistles was the one to whom Papias 
referred, and not the Apostle. Eusebius may refer to this con- 


jecture, though it does not appear distinctly before the time of 


1H. E. ui. 25 τῶν δὲ ἀντιλεγομένων 
γνωρίμων δ᾽ οὖν ὅμως τοῖς πολλοῖς. 

5. ς. εἴτε τοῦ εὐαγγελιστοῦ τυγχάνου- 
σαι εἴτε καὶ ἑτέρον ὁμωνύμου ἐκείνῳ. 
He argued from them himself as being 
written by St John: Demonstr. Ev. 
111. 5. 

3 In Joh. Tom. v. ap. Euseb, H. E. 


VI. 23. 

1 Euseb. H. 1. νι. 
Il. 15. 

5 ddv. her. 1. 16. 8, in predicta 
Epistola, having quoted in § 5, 1 John 
ii. 18 ff. Comp. 1. 16. 3 ᾿Ιωάννης ὁ τοῦ 
κυρίου μαθητής. 


14. Cf. Strom. 


AUTHORSHIP. lv 


Jerome’. But this view of the authorship of the Epistles is purely 
conjectural, There is not the least direct evidence external or 
internal in its favour ; and it is most unlikely that ‘the elder Jolin ’ 
would be in such a position as to be described by the simple title 
‘ the elder,’ which denotes a unique preéminence. 

On the other hand, there is nothing in the use of the title Not inap- 
6 πρεσβύτερος, ‘the elder,’ by the writer of the Epistles inconsistent oa 
with the belief that he was the Apostle St John. For too little is 
known of the condition of the Churches of Asia Minor at the close 
of the apostolic age to allow any certain conclusion to be formed as 
to the sense in which he may have so styled himself. The term 
was used by Irenzeus of those who held the highest office in the 
Church, perhaps through Asiatic usage, as of Polycarp, and of 
the early Bishops of Rome’; and the absolute use of it in the 
two Epistles cannot but mark a position wholly exceptional. One 
who could claim for himself the title ‘the elder’ must have occupied 
a place which would not necessarily be suggested by the title of 
‘an apostle’; and it is perfectly intelligible that St John should 
have used the title in virtue of which he wrote, rather than that 
which would have had no bearing upon his communication. As 
an illustration of the superintendence exercised in the Asiatic 
Churches by St John, see Euseb. H. #. 111. 23. 

Internal evidence amply confirms the general tenor of external Internal 
authority. The second Epistle bears the closest resemblance in lan- Sone 
guage and thought to the first. The third Epistle has the closest 
affinity to the second, though from its subject it is less like the first 
in general form. Nevertheless it offers many striking parallels to 
constructions and language of St John: v. 3 ἐν ἀληθείᾳ; 4 μειζοτέραν 
τούτων....ἵνα... 6, 12 μαρτυρεῖν τινι, LI ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν... οὐχ ἑώρακεν 
τὸν θεόν, 12 οἶδας ὅτι ἡ μαρτ. ἡ. ἀληθής ἐστιν. 

The use of the Pauline words προπέμπειν, εὐοδοῦσθαι and tyai- 
νειν, and of the peculiar words φλυαρεῖν, φιλοπρωτεύειν, ὕπολαμ- 
Bavew (in the sense of ‘welcome’), has no weight on the other side. 


1 Jerome however speaks of the 18). 
opinion as widely held in his time: 2 Tren. ap. Euseb. H. Z. v. 20. 24. 
opinio a plerisque tradita (de virr. ill. 


lvi 


Picture 

of the 
Church in 
the third 
Epistle. 


AUTHORSHIP. 


The complexion of the third Epistle is not Pauline; and the ex- 
ceptional language belongs to the occasion on which it was 


written. 


III. CHARACTER. 


The letters contain no direct indication of the time or place 
at which they were written. They seem to belong to the same 
period of the Apostle’s life as the first Epistle; and they were 
therefore probably written from Ephesus. 

The destination of the second Letter is enigmatic. No solution 
of the problem offered by ᾿Εκλεκτῇ Κυρίᾳ is satisfactory. Nor does 
the Letter itself offer any marked individuality of address. 

The third Letter, on the other hand, reveals a striking and 
in some respects unique picture of the condition of the early 
Church. There is a dramatic vigour in the outlines of character 
which it indicates. Gaius. and Diotrephes have distinct indi- 
vidualities ; and the reference to Demetrius comes in with natural 
force. Each personal trait speaks of a fulness of knowledge behind, 
and belongs to a living man. Another point which deserves 
notice is the view which is given of the independence of Christian 
societies. Diotrephes, in no remote corner, is able for a time to 
withstand an Apostle in the administration of his particular Church. 
On the other side, the calm confidence of St John seems to rest on 
himself more than on his official power. His presence will vindi- 
cate his authority. Once more, the growth of the Churches is as 
plainly marked as their independence. The first place in them 
has become an object of unworthy ambition. They are able and, 
as it appears, for the most part willing to maintain missionary 
teachers. 

Altogether this last glimpse of Christian life in the apostolic 
age is one on which the student may well linger. The state of 
things which is disclosed does not come near an ideal, but it wit- 


nesses to the freedom and vigour of a growing faith. 


ΙΏΑΝΟΥ A 
