IQANOY Γ 


TQANOY T 


O TIPECBYTEPOC Γαίῳ τῷ ἀγαπητῷ, ὃν ἐγὼ 


ἀγαπῶ ἐν ἀληθείᾳ. 


The letter is marked throughout by 
personal circumstances, and is broken 
up into short paragraphs which are 
severally suggested by these. After 
the salutation (v. 1) St John (1) ex- 
presses in general terms his joy at the 
tidings of Gaius which he hears (2— 
4); and (2) specially approves his 
hospitality towards missionary bre- 
thren (5—8). In contrast with this 
generosity (3) he condemns the ambi- 
tious self-assertion of Diotrephes (9, 
10); and then (4) gives his witness in 
favour of Demetrius (11, 12); and so 
(5) concludes (13—15). 


1. The salutation. 


The salutation stands in contrast by 
its brevity with the salutations in the 
other personal letters of the New Tes- 
tament. The wish of blessing is trans- 
posed in another form to the following 
verse. 

"The Elder to Gaius the beloved, 
whom I love in truth. 

I. Ὁ πρεσβύτερος] 2 John 1 note. 

Taio τῷ dy.] The name ‘Gaius’ 
(Caius) occurs Acts xix. 29 (a ‘Mace- 
donian’); xx. 4 (‘of Derbe’); 1 Cor. 
i. 14 (a Corinthian); Rom. xvi. 23 (a 
Corinthian). There is nothing to 
identify this Gaius with any one of 
these. Another is mentioned as 
having been made bishop of Per- 
gamum by St John (Const. Ap. vii. 


46). The position which Gaius oc- 
cupied in the church to which he 
belonged is not shown by the letter. 
The epithet ‘beloved’ is afterwards 
used asa title of address (vv. 2, 5, 11). 
It occurs several times in salutations 
of St Paul: Rom. xvi. 12; Philem. 1 
(‘the beloved’); Rom. xvi. 5, 8, 9 (‘my 
beloved’); 2 Tim. i. 2 (‘my beloved 
child’). . 

ὃν ἐγὼ ay.) The emphatic personal 
pronoun (2 John 1) seems to point 
to some gainsayers with whom the 
apostle contrasts himself. Compare 
‘thou’ (ov) in Ὁ. 3. 

ἐν ἀληθ. Comp. 2 John 1 note. 
ἐν ἀληθείᾳ ἀγαπᾷ ὁ κατὰ Κύριον ἀγαπῶν 
(Gicumen.). 


2. The teacher's joy (2—4). 


St John, having much ground for 
sorrow and disappointment, begins 
with the expression of joy (comp. 2 
John 4). Some of his own children 
(comp. 2 John d.c.), Gaius among them, 
were loyal to the Truth. He could wish 
him nothing better than that all his 
circumstances should correspond to 
his spiritual progress. 

The salutation is completed, after 
the common model, in 7. 1. The se- 
cond verse adds what corresponds to 
the fuller Christian greeting (2 John 


3). 
ΞΒοϊουσα, I pray that in all things 


236 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[2, 3,4 


vA if \ f oe , > ὃ “- θ \ 
γάπητε, σέρι σπαντῶν EVYOMAL σε ευοοουσῦαι Και 


© , ει ᾽ a ἤ © , 
UYLALVELV, καθὼς εὐοδοῦταί σου ἢ ψυχή. 


3éyapny yap 


λίαν ἐρχομένων ἀδελφῶν καὶ μαρτυρούντων Gov TH ἀλη- 


t A \ μὰ & γος 
θείᾳ, καθὼς σὺ ἐν ἀληθείᾳ περιπατεῖς. 


3 ἐχάρην γάρ ABC me syr: om. γάρ ὃὰ vg the. 
καθὼς σύ: om. σύ A. 


(at the end of a line). 


thou mayest prosper and be in good 
health ecen as thy soul prospereth. 
3For I rejoiced (rejoice) greatly when 
brethren came (come) and bore (bear) 
witness to thy truth, even as thou 
walkest in truth. +I have no greater 
grace than these tidings, that I may 
hear of mine own children walking 
in the truth. 

2, ᾿Αγαπητέ] carissime V. (co. 5, 11). 
For the use of the plural see 1 John 
ii. 7 note. 

περὶ π. εὔχ. oe evod....] de omnibus 
orationem facio prospere te ingredi 
V. Jn all things 1 pray that thou 
mayest be prosperous... The phrase 
περὶ πάντων is remarkable. It may 
go with εὐοδοῦσθαι or with the sen- 
tence generally (comp. I Cor. xvi. 
1). The sense ‘above all things’ is 
not justified by any parallel in the 
N. T. or yxx.; and the context points 
to a contrast between ‘the soul’ and 
other things. The thought appears 
to be of the public and social work of 
Gaius as distinguished from his per- 
sonal progress, though ὑγιαίνειν may 
point to some illness. 

εὔχομαι] The word is rare in N.T.: 
2 Cor. xiii. 7, 9; Acts xxvi. 29; xxvii. 
29. 

evod. καὶ ὑγιαίνειν] The elements of 
progress and vigour are combined. 
For εὐοδοῦσθαι see 1 Cor. xvi. 2; 
Rom. i. 10. In St Paul ὑγιαίνειν is 
always used metaphorically of sound 
doctrine; but it occurs in the literal 
sense of sound health in St Luke: v. 
31, Vii. 10, XV. 27. 

καθὼς. «ψυχή) sicut prospere agit 
anima tua V. Ψυχή expresses here 
the principle of the higher life (‘soul’) 


4 werCoTépav 


μαρτυρούντων : μαρτυρουν B 


(Hebr. vi. 19, x. 39, xiii. 17; 1 Pet. ii. 
11, iv. 19). The nearest approach to 
this sense elsewhere in St John’s 
writings is John xii. 27 (x. 24). In 
other places he uses it only of the 
principle of the ‘natural’ life. 

3. ἐχάρην γάρ... Comp. 2 John 4. 
The joy which the apostle felt at the 
tidings of the action of Gaius is given 
in explanation of his far-reaching wish 
for his welfare, and not only as an 
assuratice of his spiritual well-being. 
The words evidently point to some 
difficulties from false teaching which 
Gaius had boldly met, though as yet 
the issue of his work was uncertain. 

épxop. ἀδ.] when brethren came not 
on one occasion only (ἐλθόντων) but 
from time to time, though all these . 
visits belonged definitely to the past 
(ἐχάρην) when the apostle wrote. The 
words give a vivid picture of con- 
tinued troubles even in the apostolic 
church. 

ἀδελφῶν] ve. 5, το. 
iii. 14 addit. note. 

papt. o. τῇ ἀλ.] testimonium per- 
hibentibus ceritati tue V., bore wit- 
ness to thy truth, attested the perfect 
and sincere loyalty with which you 
maintain the fulness of the Christian 
faith in life. Christian thought and 
Christian action are inseparable. 

καθὼς ov...) even as thou rwalkest 
in truth, truly. Comp. 2 John 4. 
The emphatic pronoun (σύ) suggests 
a contrast with others as (for exam- 
ple) Diotrephes. Gaius walked not 
only in word but really (ἐν ἀληθ. I 
John iii, 18) according to the standard 
of the Christian revelation (ἐν τῇ ἀλ. 
‘in the Truth’). The clause seems to 


Comp. τ John 


5] THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


237 


, ᾿ ΄ ΓΤ ‘ ᾽ 
τούτων οὐκ ἔχω χαριν, ἵνα ἀκούω τὰ ἐμὰ τέκνα ἐν 


“~ ey ,ὔ A 
TH ἀληθείᾳ περιπατοῦντα. 


4 τούτων οὐκ ἔ. x. NAB: τούτων x. οὐκ ἔ. C. 


τῇ ad. ABC*: 


B vg me: χαράν SNAC the. 


be one of those personal comments 
in which St John pausing on what is 
written, as it were, thinks aloud: 
‘They witnessed to thy truth; yes, 
and when the vision of vain profes- 
sions rises before me I know that 
thou at least livest indeed as thou 
teachest.’ 

4. μειζοτέραν...χάριν, ἵνα... mutjo- 
rem horum non habeo gratiam quam 
ut...V. I have no greater grace 
—favour from God—than these ti- 
dings, that I may hear... The plural 
τούτων ‘these things’ does not refer 
to what follows (‘that I may hear’) 
but to what precedes, the manifold 
testimonies which St John received of 
the courageous resolution with which 
Gaius maintained the Truth in the 
face of difficulties. The end assured 
by such tidings was the open acknow- 
ledgment of the fidelity of disciples 
(‘that so I may hear’). Even if St 
John had himself no doubt of the 
fact, it would be a joy to know that it 
was also observed by others. For the 
construction see John xv. 13 note. 

For the form μειζότερος compare 
ἐλαχιστότερος Eph. 111. 8. 

ἔχω χάριν] The use of χάρις is re- 
markable; but χάρις makes the ‘joy’ 
(χαρά) of the common text itself a 
divine gift. The word is very rare 
in St John (2 John 3 note). Here 
it expresses the divine favour in a 
concrete form. So it is used of the 
gracious gift of men: 1 Cor. xvi. 3. 
‘To have grace’ (or ‘a grace’) here 
corresponds with ‘giving’ (Rom. xii. 
6, &c.) and ‘receiving’ grace (Rom. i. 
5). Ἔχειν χάριν is used elsewhere in 
different constructions and senses: 
ἔχειν χάριν τινί Luke xvii. 9; 1 Tim. i. 
12; ἔ. x. πρός τινα Acts ii. 47. 


τὰ ἐμὰ τι) mine own children 


é A 
δ᾽ λγαπητέ, πιστὸν 


ἔχω: ἔχων Β΄. 
om τῇ SN. 


χάριν 


(Philem. το), not simply τὰ τέκνα μου. 
Those Christians to whom the apostle 
had been the human author of spi- 
ritual life: 1 Cor. iv. 14,17; 1 Timi 
2, &e.; 2 John 1, 13. Texvia, the title 
of affection, would be used of all to 
whom he at present stood in the po- 
sition of father: 1 John ii. 1, note. 

ἐν τῇ ad. περιπ.)] The phrase is not 
found elsewhere in N. T. Comp. ἐν τῷ 
ok. (ἐν τῇ ox.) π. τ John i. 6; ii. 11; 
ἐν τῷ φωτὶ π. τ John i. 7; ἐν αὐτῇ (τῇ 
ἀγάπῃ) π. 2 John 6. For the image 
see 1 John i. 6, note. 


3. The duty of generosity to the 
brethren (5—8). 


Gaius appears to have incurred the 
displeasure of some in his Church 
by entertaining strange brethren. St 
John emphatically approves what he 
had done, and enforces such hospi- 
tality as a Christian duty. 

In this brief notice we have a vivid 
sketch of the work and of the difficul- 
ties of the first ‘Evangelists’: Eph. 
iv. 11. Compare Doctr. of App. 11 ff. 

3Beloved, thou makest sure whatso- 
ecer thou dcest unto the brethren and 
strangers withal, ‘who bore witness 
to thy love before the church; whom 
thou wilt do well to help forward 
on their journey worthily of God ; 
tfor they went out for the Name's 
sake, taking nothing fromthe Gentiles. 
8We therefore ought to welcome such 
that we may be fellow workers with 
the truth. 

5. πιστὸν π.] fideliter facisV. The 
phrase is commonly interpreted : ‘thou 
doest a faithful work, a work which 
answers to thy faith: so cum. ἄξιον 
πιστοῦ ἀνδρός. No parallel is quoted 
in support of such a sense of πιστός. 
The more natural rendering is rather 


238 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[6,7 


ποιεῖς ὃ ἐὰν ἐργάσῃ εἰς τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς καὶ τοῦτο ξένους, 
Sot ἐμαρτύρησάν σου τῇ ἀγάπη ἐνώπιον ἐκκλησίας, ous 


καλῶς ποιήσεις προπέμψας ἀξίως τοῦ θεοῦ" 


5 ἐργάσῃ: ἐργάζῃ A. 


6 οὔς: ov Β΄. 
‘thou makest sure’; that is, such an 
act will not be lost, will not fail of its 
due issue and reward (Apoc. xxi. 5). 
This sense falls in well with the context 
(comp. Apoc. xiv. 13), and explains 
the use of the two verbs, ποιεῖν, ἐργά- 
ζεσθαι, which are combined also in 
Col. iii. 2 

ὃ ἐὰν épy.] The indefinite form (ὃ 
ἐάν as contrasted with 6) marks the 
variety of service. For ἐργάζομαι see 
John vi. 28, ix. 4; and for ἐργ. εἰς, 
Matt. xxvi. Io. 

καὶ τοῦτο &] et hoc in...V., and 
strangers withal. The fact that this 
detail is emphasised in the commenda- 
tion of the hospitality of Gaius seems 
to imply that it had been made the 
occasion of unjust blame. For καὶ 
τοῦτο compare 1 Cor. vi. 6; Phil. i. 
28; Eph. ii. 8. Viewed rightly the 
fact that these brethren were stran- 
gers gave them a more pressing claim 
upon the common ties of brotherhood. 
Comp. Hebr. xiii. 2 note. 

6. οἱ ἐμαρτ....1 Those who in one par- 
ticular case experienced the habitual 
hospitality of Gaius bore open testi- 
mony to his character iu a public as- 
sembly of the church where the writer 
was, gathered together, as it may seem, 
to receive their report: comp. Acts 
xiv. 26 ff For ἐνώπιον ἐκκλ. (not τῆς 
ἐκκὰλ.) compare ἐν éxxd. 1 Cor. xiv. 19, 
35: ἐν συναγωγῇ John vi. 59, xviii. 
20; 2 Mace. xiv. 5 προσκληθεὶς εἰς 
συνέδριον 7. a meeting of the Council. 
Doctr. Ap. iv. 14 ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ ἐξομολο- 
γήσῃ τὰ παραπτώματά σου. 

ods κι π. προπέμψας} guos benefa- 
ciens deduces (benefacies ducens)_V. 
Those who had before found help 
from Gaius now again required it for 
a special work. The future implies a 


καὶ τοῦτο NABC vg me the syrr: 
ποιήσεις προπέμψας: ποιήσας προπέμψεις C (lat). 


Τὑπὲρ γὰρ 


καὶ εἰς τούς 5. 


wish which, it is assumed, will at once 
be fulfilled. Comp. Rom. vi. 14. For 
προπέμψας see Acts xv. 3; Tit. iii. 13. 
The latter passage suggests that the 
word includes some provision for the 
journey as well as sympathetic attend- 
ance: Acts xxi. 3. St John regards 
the act in its completeness (προπέμ- 
was) and not in process (προπέμπων). 
This makes the combination of the 
aor. and fut. natural. For προπ. 
compare Polyc. Phil. 1 cuveyapny 


ae if 
ὑμῖν.. προπέμψασιν ws ἐπέβαλεν ὑμῖν 
τοὺς ἐνειλημμένους τοῖς ἁγιοπρέπεσι 
δεσμοῖς. 


καλῶς ποι.] Acts x. 33; James ii. ὃ 
(19); 2 Pet. i. 19; 1 Cor. vii. 37 f.; 
Phil. iv. 14. 

Compare Ign. Smyrn. τὸ Φίλωνα 
καὶ “Péov ᾿Αγαθόπουν, of ἐπηκολούθησάν 
μοι εἰς λόγον θεοῦ, καλῶς ἐποιήσατε 
ὑποδεξάμενοι ὡς διακόνους Χριστοῦ θεοῦ. 

ἀξ. τ. 0.1 worthily of their dedica- 
tion to the service of God: John siii. 
20. Comp. 1 Thess. ii. 12; Col. 1. 10 
ἀξ. τοῦ κυρίου. 

7. ὑπὲρ γὰρ τ. ov.) pro nomine 
enim V., for the Name's sake, that is, 
to make the Name better known: 
Rom. i. 5. 

‘The name’ is used absolutely Acts 
v. 41 (comp. Ὁ. 40 ἐπὶ τῷ dv. Ἰησοῦ). 
Comp. James ii. 7. It is also found 
in the letters of Ignatius: ad Eph. 7 τὸ 
ὄνομα περιφέρειν: ad Philad.tobo£acat 
τὸ ὄνομα. Comp. ad Eph. τ δέδεμαι 
ὑπὲρ τοῦ κοινοῦ ὀνόματος καὶ ἐλπίδος: 
id. 3 εἰ. οδέδεμαι € ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι οὔπω 
ἀπήρτισμαι ἐν Ἰησοῦ Χριστῷ. From 
the contexts it is evident that ‘the 
Name’ is ‘Jesus Christ’ (‘the Lord 
Jesus’), or, as it is written at length, 
‘Jesus Christ, the Son of God’ (John 
Xx. 31; 1 John iv. 15). This ‘Name’ 


8] THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


239 


΄ ἢ , 2 ΄ Α tA 2 i 
TOU ὀνόματος ἐξῆλθαν μηδὲν λαμβάνοντες ἀπὸ τῶν 


ἐθνικών. 


€ - ἐκ τ Ψ \ 
δἡμεῖς οὖν ὀφείλομεν ὑπολαμβάνειν τοὺς τοι- 


ΙΑ Sf A ᾿ ΄σ ᾽ r 
ovTous, iva συνεργοὶ γινώμεθα TH ἀληθείᾳ. 


7 ὀνόματος : -ἰ αὐτοῦ Elz. 
ὑπολαμβάνειν : ἀπολαμβάνειν ς΄. 
ἐκκλησίᾳ N*A. 


is in essence the sum of the Christian 
Creed (comp. 1 Cor. xii. 3; Rom. x. 9). 

When analysed it reveals the triune 
‘Name’ into which the Christian is 
baptized, Matt. xxviii. 19. Compare 
also 1 Pet. iv. 16 ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τούτῳ, 
Le. Christian. 

With the absolute use of ‘the 
Name’ may be compared the abso- 
lute use of ‘the Way’; Acts ix. 2, xix. 
9, 23, Xxiv. 22. 

See Additional Note. 

ἐξῆλθαν] profecti sunt V., they went 
Jorth from some Church, well known 
to the apostle and Gaius, on a mission 
of Truth, as others went forth on a 
mission of error (2 John 7; 1 John ii. 
19). Comp. Acts xv. 4o. 

μηδὲν au B....] taking nothing as 
their habitual rule. This trait is given 
not as ἃ simple fact (οὐδὲν λαμβ.), but 
asa mark of character. These teachers 
refused to receive hospitality from 
Gentiles who were unconverted. Many 
reasons may have recommended such 
a rule. St Paul alludes frequently to 
difficulties which arose even from that 
reasonable provision by the Church 
which St John here claims: 1 Thess. 
ii. 6 ff.; 1 Cor. ix. 14 f.; 2 Cor. xii. 16 ff. 
For λαμβ. ἀπὸ see Matt. xvii. 25. 

ἀπὸ τῶν ἐθνικ.] a gentilibus (genti- 
bus) V., from the Gentiles to whom 
they carried the Gospel. The form 
used (ἐθνικός) describes character ra- 
ther than mere position: Matt. v. 47, 
vi. 7, xviii. 17. It does not seem to 
be found in the uxx. 

ὃ. ἡμεῖς οὖν.. We therefore, as 
fellow Christians, owght (are bound, 
1 John ii. 6 note) to receive (support) 
such. The word ὑπολαμβάνειν (sus- 
cipere V.) gives the notion of wel- 


ἀπὸ τῶν : om. τῶν C. 
γινώμεθα : γινόμεθα Ο. 


ἐθνικῶν : ἐθνῶν ς΄. 8 
ἀληθείᾳ NBC vg: 


coming with hospitable support. 

ἵνα συν. yw. τῇ ἀλ.] ut cooperato- 
res simus veritatis V. The phrase is 
ambiguous. The fellowship may be 
either with the teachers: ‘that we 
may be fellow-workers with them in 
support of the truth’; or (better) with 
the truth, the substance of their teach- 
ing: ‘that we may help the truth which 
is effective through them’; comp. 
Phil. 1. 27 συναθλοῦντες τῇ πίστει τοῦ 
εὐαγγελίου and Bp Lightfoot’s note. 
The word συνεργός is not used else- 
where in the N. T. or Luxx with the 
dat. It is used with the gen. of the 
person with whom the worker coope- 
rates (6.9. Rom. xvi. 21 ὁ συν. pov, 1 
Cor. iii. 9 θεοῦ cuvepyoi), and with the 
gen. of the object, 1 Cor. 111. 9 συνεργοὶ 
τῆς χαρᾶς, τ Mace, xiv. 5. It is also 
used with eis (Col. iv. 11 συν. εἰς τὴν 
βασιλείαν) and πρός (2 Mace. viii. 7 
πρὸς τὰς...ἐπιβουλὰς συν.) of the ob- 
ject. The verb is used with the dat. 
of that which is helped, James ii. 22 
συνήργει τοῖς ἔργοις, τ Mace. xii. 1; and 
this construction is sufficient to sup- 
port the connexion of συν. with τῇ aa. 


4. The temporury triumph of 
ambition (9, 10). 

As yet St John had not succeeded in 
removing the opposition from which 
Gaius suffered ; but he makes it clear 
that the issue cannot be doubtful. 

91 wrote a few words to the 
Church; but he that loveth to have 
the preeminence among them, Dio- 
trephes, doth not receive us. For 
this cause, if I come I will call to 
remembrance his works which he 
doeth, prating of us with evil words ; 
and, since he is not content therewith 


240 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[9, to 


"Eypawa τι τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ: ἀλλ᾽ ὁ φιλοπρωτεύων 


αὐτῶν Διοτρέφης οὐκ ἐπιδέχεται ἡμάς. 


‘ ΄σ 
Oia τοῦτο, 


ἘΝ at « , > ms A at « - , 

ἐὰν ἔλθω, ὑπομνήσω αὐτοῦ τὰ ἔργα a ποιεῖ, λογοις 
ἊΝ a a ‘ \ t 4 ΄ 

πονηροῖς φλυαρῶν ἡμᾶς, καὶ μὴ ἀρκούμενος ἐπὶ τούτοις 


9 ἔγραψα N*AC: ἔγραψα ἄν N* vg syrr: 


syrr. 10 ἡμᾶς: els ἡμᾶς C. 

neither doth he receive the brethren 
himself and them that would he 
hindereth and casteth out of the 
Church. 

9. "Ἐγραψάτι] scripsissem forsitan 
V., I wrote a few words. The use of 
τι to express ‘something of import- 
ance’ is foreign to the N. T. and un- 
suitable to the context. St John 
treats his letter lightly. The letter, 
which may be regarded as the type of 
a class, has not been preserved. To 
escape from the difficulty supposed to 
be involved in the loss of an apostolic 
letter several early authorities intro- 
duced ἄν (as V.). 

τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ] to the Church to which 
Gaius belonged, as well as now to 
Gaius himself. St John had by this 
time heard that his letter had for the 
present failed. This is the only pas- 
sage in his Epistles (v. 6 is different) 
in which St John speaks of ‘a Church.’ 
The word ἐκκλησία does not occur 
in his Gospel. In the Apocalypse (as 
here) ‘the Church’ is always used of 
the special society in a particular 
place (comp. Apoc. xxii. 16 ἐπὶ ταῖς 
ἐκκλησίαις) ; 80 that St John nowhere 
gives a distinct expression to the 
thought worked out in Eph. i. 22, v. 
23 ff.; though he records the gift of 
its new life, John xx. 21 ff. 

ὁ φιλοπρ....Δ.7 ts qui amat prima- 
tum gerere in tis 1). V., he that loveth 
to have the preeminence among (or 
over) them.... The word φιλόπρωτος 
occurs in late Greek (Polyb. Plut.), but 
φιλοπρωτεύειν is not quoted from any 
other passage. The idea of πρωτεύειν 
governs the gen. αὐτῶν, which answers 


ἔγραψας B. ἔγρ. τι: om. τι SNE VE 


to ἡ ἐκκλησία (comp. 1 Cor. i. 2 τῇ 
ἐκκλ., ἡγιασμένοις). It is of interest 
to compare the two sources of failure 
noticed in the two Epistles, προάγειν 
(2 John 9) and φιλοπρωτεύειν, the un- 
due claims to intellectual progress 
and to personal authority. There is 
nothing to indicate that Diotrephes 
held false opinions : his ambition only 
is blamed. Comp. Herm. Zim. viii. 
7, 4 ἔχοντες ζῆλόν τινα ἐν ἀλλήλοις περὶ 
πρωτείων καὶ περὶ δόξης τινός: id. 7. 

οὐκ ἐπιδέχ. ἡ. In Ὁ. 10 the word is 
used of the literal welcome of visitors : 
here it is naturally understood of the 
recognition of the apostle’s wish as 
authoritative. Comp. 1 Macc. x. 1 
ἐπεδέξαντο αὐτόν (as sovereign); xii. 
8, 43; X. 46 ἐπεδ. λόγους; Ecclus. vi. 
26 eed. παιδείαν. By the use of ἡμᾶς 
(contrast ἔγραψα τ. 1 ἐγώ) St John 
removes the question from a personal 
issue. He identifies himself with the 
society (vv. 8, 12 ἡμεῖς, 1 John iv. 6; v. 
14 ἴ.). 

10. διὰ rovro...] St John implies 
that his personal presence will be de- 
cisive. By using the form ἐὰν ἔλθω 
there is no doubt thrown on the main 
fact of his coming (δ. 14). Comp. 1 
John ii. 28. 

ὑπομν. αὐτ. τ. &] commoneam ejus 
opera V., I will call to remembrance 
his works, 1 will bring them to his 
notice and to the notice of others. 
“Yropysmoxew is used with the acc. 
of the person (2 Pet. i. 12) and of the 
thing (2 Tim. ii. 14), and of both 
(John xiv. 26). 

λ. πον. pr. ἡ.] verbis malignis gar- 
riens in nos V., prating of us with 


11, 12] 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


241 


οὔτε αὐτὸς ἐπιδέχεται τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς καὶ τοὺς βουλο- 

μένους κωλύει καὶ ἐκ τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἐκβάλλει. 
WAyarnteé, μὴ μιμοῦ τὸ κακὸν ἀλλὰ τὸ ἀγαθόν. 

ὁ ἀγαθοποιῶν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν: 6 κακοποιῶν οὐχ 


ce 


᾿ t 
ἑώρακεν Tov θεόν. 


βουλομένους : ἐπιδεχομένους Ο the. 
ὁ δὲ κακοπ. ς΄ me. 


evil words (Matt. v.11; Acts xxviii. 
21). The adj. φλύαρος occurs 1 Tim. 
v. 13. 

μὴ ἀρκ. ἐπὶ t.] quast non et ἰδία 
suficiant V.. and since he does not 
rest content therewtth... ᾿Αρκεῖσθαι is 
used with the simple dat. Luke iii. 
14; Hebr. xiii. 5; 1 Tim. vi. 8. 

ovre...xal...] nec...et... V. John iv. 
Il. 

κωλύει... ἐκβάλλει] The verbs do not 
necessarily express more than the 
purpose and effort: comp. John x. 
32 (Matt. iii, 14). It is difficult to 
realise the circumstances of the case. 
It may perhaps be reasonably con- 
jectured from ὁ φιλοπρωτεύων that 
Diotrephes regarded the reception of 
the brethren as an invasion of his 
authority. 

ἐκβάλλει] Luke vi. 22; John ix. 34 f. 


5. The witness to the faithful dis- 
ciple (11, 12). 

Self-seeking may have its tempting 
successes, but they rest on no secure 
foundation. The faithful are supported 
by many converging testimonies. 

Beloved, imitate not that which 
ts evil but that which is good. He 
that doeth good is of God; he that 
doeth evil hath not seen God. *De- 
metrius hath witness borne to him 
by all and by the truth itself: yea 
we also bear witness; and thou 
knowest that our witness is true. 

II. ᾿Αγαπητέ...] The transition lies 
in the thought of the power which 
Diotrephes had won by wrong means. 

μὴ μιμοῦ] noli imitart V. Comp. 
2 Thess. iii. 7,9; Hebr. xiii 7. The 

W. J. 


ἐκ THs ἐκκλ.: om. ἐκ N. 


12 4 , eA ΄ 
Δημητρίῳ μεμαρτυρηται UTO σπαν- 


TI ὁκακοπ.: 


noun μιμητής occurs several times: e.g. 
1 Cor. iv. 16; Eph. v. 1. 

TO κι.τὸ ἀγ....1 malum...quod bo- 
num est V. Rom. xii. 21. 

dyaé,...caxom....] Mk. iii, 4; Luke 
vi. 9; 1 Pet. iii. 17. 

ἐκ τοῦ θ. é....0vx ἑώρ. τ. 6....] The 
two stages of divine relationship cor- 
respond with the two characters. He 
who does good proves by his action 
that his life springs from God as its 
source (εἶναι ἐκ τ. 6. Addit. Note on 
1 John iii. 1): he who does evil has not 
made the first step towards partici- 
pation in the Divine Nature (1 John 
iii. 6 note). In one sense the vision of 
God (the Father) in Christ (John xiv. 
9) is the condition of fellowship with 
Him: in another sense the vision of 
God as God lies beyond the power of 
man (John i. 18). 

It is likely that here, as elsewhere, 
St John points to men who professed 
to have deeper insight into truth and 
disparaged the importance of virtuous 
action. 

12. Δημητρίῳ μεμαρτ. From the 
unfaithful St John turns to the faith- 
ful: from the ‘evil’ to the ‘good.’ Itis 
likely from the context that, Demetrius 
was the bearer of the letter. For μαρτ. 
τινί see John iii. 26; Luke iv. 22; 
Acts xv. 8; and in pass. Acts vi. 3; x. 
22; xvi. 2; xxii12; 1 Tim. v. 10, &e. 

St John appeals to a threefold wit- 
ness given in favour of Demetrius (1) 
ὑπὸ π. by all, that is the general wit- 
ness of men arising out of the ex- 
perience of life; (2) ὑπ᾽ avr. τ. dd. by 
the Truth itself, so far as the ideal of 
Christianity was seen to be realised by 


16 


242 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[13-.|1δ 


A € \ ᾽ ae 3 6 , ry ᾿ © ~ δὲ ἘΞ 
των καὶ ὑπὸ αὐτῆς τῆς ἀληθείας" καὶ ἡμεῖς δὲ μαρτυ 
δὰ “5: « ε , © “- ᾽ ᾿ 3 
ροῦμεν, καὶ οἶδας ὅτι ἡ μαρτυρία ἡμῶν ἀληθής ἐστιν. 
ἫΝ > > > , \ ΄ 
13 Πολλὰ εἶχον γράψαι σοι, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ θέλω διὰ μέ- 
, 2 ΄ὔ \ ἢ 
λανος καὶ καλάμου σοι γράφειν' "ἐλπίζω δὲ εὐθέως σε 
2 - \ ΄ A ΄ r λή 15 Ει a 
ἰδεῖν, Kal στόμα πρὸς στόμα λαλήσομεν. ἰρήνη σοι. 


ΕῚ € fi 
ἀσπαζονταί σε οἱ φίλοι. 
ὄνομα. 


12 τῆς ἀληθείας: τῆς ἐκκλησίας καὶ τῆς Gd. Ο: τῆς ἐκκλησίας A* (9). 
ς. ἡ μαρτ. ἡ. ad. ἐστ.: ad. ἡ. ἐστ. ἡ μαρτ. Ο. 


οὐ θέλω : οὐκ ἐβουλήθην A (2 ΦοΟΒῺ 12). 
γράφειν : γράψαι S. 
15 οἱ φίλοι : οἱ ἀδελφοί A. 


him; (3) καὶ yp. δὲ μαρτ. yea and we 
also bear witness: St John and those 
with him spoke with the authority of 
the Church. 

For the combination pepapr., pap- 
τυροῦμεν see John v. 33, 36. The 
witness given in the past was still 
effective while it was also complete: 
the witness of St John came with 
present fresh force. 

ὑπὸ π.} by all. It is possible that 
these words are to be taken quite 
generally: 1 Tim. iii. 7; though it is 
not necessary to extend them beyond 
the circle of Christians. 

καί...δέ...7 See 1 John i. 3. 

καὶ οἶδας] The words in John xxi. 
24 sound like an echo of this sentence. 

This verse serves the purpose of ‘a 
commendatory letter’ (συστατικὴ ἐπι- 
στολή 2 Cor. iii. 1). 


6. The conclusion (13—15). 


131 had many things to write to 
thee, howbeit I will not write to thee 
with ink and pen; “but T hope to 
see thee shortly, and we will speak 
Jace to face. 

sPeace be to thee; the friends 


14 σε ἰδεῖν ABC vg: ἰδεῖν σε SN me. 
ects τς δὲ . 
ἀσπάζου : ἄσπασαι &. 


’ Pa ‘ I 
ἀσπάζου τοὺς φίλους κατ᾽ 


οἶδας: οἴδατε 
13 γράψαι cor: γράφειν ς΄. 
σοι yp. NBC: yp. σοι A vg me the syrr. 
πρός: πρό B*. 


salute thee: salute the friends by 
name, 

13. εἶχον] The writer goes back to 
the time when the letter was begun. 
See 2 John 12. The variations in 
form are worth notice: ἔχων οὐκ 
ἐβουλήθην, εἶχον ἀλλ᾽ οὐ θέλω---ὑμῖν 
γράφειν, γράψαι σοι---διὰ χάρτου καὶ μέ- 
λανος, διὰ μέλανος καὶ καλάμου---γενέ- 
σθαι πρὸς v., εὐθ. σε ἰδεῖν---λαλῆσαι, 
λαλήσομεν. If the second Epistle was 
addressed to a Church it would not 
be difficult to shew that there is a 
fitness in the subtle differences in 
tone. 

15. Εἰρήνη σοι] Peace be to thee: 
1 Pet. v.14. Asa formula of greeting’: 
Luke x. §; xxiv. 36; John xs. 19, 21, 
26. And so (in combination with 
other words) in epistolary salutations: 
2 John 3 note. 

οἱ φίλοι) our friends. The word 
does not occur again in the Epistles in 
this connexion. Comp. Acts xxvii. 3. 
It gives a faint glimpse of personal 
relationships. Comp. John xv. 13 ff 

kar’ ὄνομα] per nomen V. Comp. 
John x. 3 (xx. 16). Polye. Pail. 13 


> G ᾿ς 2 4 
ἀσπάζομαι.. «πάντας Kat ὄνομα. 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Additional Note on v. 7. The Divine Name. 


The idea of the ‘Name’ (DY, ὄνομα) has a far deeper significance in 
Biblical language than in our own. As applied to God it expresses that 
which has been made known of Him; or, more exactly to distinguish the 
two factors in the revelation, that which he has made known of Himself, 
and which man can apprehend as addressed to him. Thus the Name of 
God does not represent His Essence as He is in Himself but the manifesta- 
tion of Himself which He has been pleased to give: that view of His 
Being and Character by which it is His will to be known, and under which 
He authorises man to address Him (comp. Gen. xvi. 13, xxxii. 29; Ex. vi. 3). 
And as applied to men the new name symbolises a new state, a new work 
and new powers for its fulfilment (Apoc. ii. 17, iii, 12, xxii. 4). 

Under this aspect the name of God is used in two ways. It may 
express some particular revelation, expressed by one definite title (Z/- 
Shaddai, Jehocah, Father), or the whole sum of these manifold revelations 
taken together as one supreme revelation (ὁ θεός, God). 

Hence it comes to pass that the ‘Name’ often stands for God Himself 
so far as it brings Him before man: Ex. xxiii. 21 (my Name is in Him, te. 
the Angel of the Covenant); 1 K. viii. 29 (the place of which Thou hast 
said: My Name shall be there); Is. xxx. 27 (Behold the Name of the Lord 
cometh from far). 

‘To blaspheme the Name’ was the same as ‘blaspheming the Name of 
the Lord’ (Lev. xxiv. 11, 16), that is blaspheming God as He had revealed 
Himself through Moses to His people (comp. Ex. vi. 3). And in the Acts 
(iii. 13, 16) it is said that the Name of ‘Jesus, the Servant of the God of 
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob’ gave strength to the lame man (comp. Acts 
iv. 30, 12). 

It follows as a natural consequence that the Divine Names in the Bible 
give in a broad outline the course of revelation. 

There is first the general name El, Elohim, which expresses man’s 
feeling after God, apart from any special revelation. 

Then follows the patriarchal title HiShaddai, which indicates the 
exercise of the sovereign might of God for the fulfilment of His counsel. 

Then the covenant name Jehovah, which is developed in the titles 
‘the Holy One, ‘the Lord of Hosts.’ 

Then follows a silence, when the Divine Name is unspoken. 

At last the revelation of the Father is given: ὁ πατήρ μου καὶ πατὴρ 
ὑμῶν καὶ θεός μου καὶ θεὸς ὑμῶν᾽ (John xx. 17). 

Two names present the two main views of God in the O. T., Elohim 
and Jehovah. The former, the generic name, gathers up what St Paul 
speaks of as τὸ γνωστὸν τοῦ Geo... ἀΐδιος αὐτοῦ δύναμις καὶ θειότης (Rom. i. 
19 f.), all that man is made to recognise little by little from the study of his 
own constitution and the world without. The latter, the proper name, 
gathers up all that God made known of Himself in His dealings with His 
people during the discipline of the first Covenant. Speaking generally 


16—2 


243 


The 

Divine 
ame in 

the O. T. 


244 


The 
Divine 
Name in 
the N. T. 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Elohim describes the God of Nature, Jehovah the God of revelation. The 
former includes the ideas of the creation, preservation, and general fixed 
government of finite things: the latter, the idea of living, progressive 
intercourse with men, of whom Israel were for the time the representa- 
tives. The great confession of the chosen people was to declare that the 
God of revelation is the God for Whom man’s soul craves, One in His 
infinite perfections: Deut. vi. 4 ‘Jehovah our Elohim (or is our Elohinv, 
Jehovah is One’ (comp. 1 John v. 20). For the use of ‘the Name’ abso- 
lutely see 2 Sam. vi. 2 (R. V.). 

Not to dwell in detail here upon the Divine Names in the O. T. it must 
be noticed that the idea of ‘the Name’ is no less prominent in the N. T. 
Thus the Lord characterises His own Mission as a ‘Coming in the Name of 
His Father’ (John v. 43); and the Mission of the Holy Spirit as a Mission in 
His Name (John xiv. 26 ὃ πέμψει ὁ πατὴρ ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί pou). He gloritied 
His Father and manifested His Father’s Name to men (John xvii. 4, 6) ; 
and it is the work of the Holy Spirit to glorify Him, and to take of His 
and declare it to His disciples (John xvi. 14). In the one case, if we may 
so speak, the Name of the Father was completely shewn : God was made 
known perfectly in this relation by the fact of the Incarnation. In the 
other case the Church is learning little by little the Name of the Son. 

The most complete expression of the Divine Name is that given in 
Matt. xxviii. 19 τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος, 
but the essence of this Name so written at length is the simple Name 
‘Jesus Christ’ or ‘the Lord Jesus,’ or even ‘ Jesus’ alone, when the context 
determines the office attached to it: ὄν. °L Xp. (Acts ii. 38, iii. 6, iv. το, viii. 
12, x. 48, Xvi. 18; ὄν. rod κυρίου “I. Acts viii. 16 (ix. 14) (xv. 26), xix. 5, 13, 
17, xxi. 13; ὄν. I. Acts iv. 18 (30), V. 40, ix. 27, xxvi. 9). 

In the Epistles the Name of revelation, the Lord’s Name, occurs in 
several forms: ‘the Name of Christ’: 1 Pet. iv. 14(16); ‘the Name of the 
Lord’: James y. 14 (? contrast τ. 10); ‘the Name of our Lord Jesus’: 2 
Thess. i. 12; ‘the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ’: 1 Cor. i. 2, 10; (τ. 4, 
vi. 113) Rom. i. 5; Eph. v. 20; (Col. iii. 17;) ‘the Name of Jesus’: 
Phil. ii. 10. Compare Additional Note on 1 John iii. 23. 

The phrase ‘the Name of God’ is found in the Epistles only in 1 Tim. 
vi. 1, besides quotations from the xx. (Hebr. vi. 10, xiii. 15), and the 
context explains its use. In the Apocalypse it occurs xvi. 9 (comp. iii. 12). 

The characteristic Name of God in the N. T. is ‘the Father’ (Matt. vi. 9; 
John xii. 28; comp. Additional Note on i. 2). 

From what has been said the full force of the phrases ‘to believe in the 
name’ (πιστεύειν εἰς τὸ dv. 1 John v. 13 note), ‘to ask in the name’ (John 
xiv. 13 note), ‘to be gathered in (into eis) the name’ (Matt. xviii. 20), ‘to 
have life in the name’ (John xx. 31) becomes evident. In every case the 
Name brings before the mind that aspect of the Divine Person which is 
realised by faith in each action of the spiritual life. 

In close connexion with the idea of the Divine Name is that of the 
Divine Glory (Introd. to Gosp. of St John pp. xlvii. ff). The Name expresses 
the revelation as it is apprehended and used by man. Man is called by the 
Name and employs it. The Glory expresses rather the manifestation of the 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Divine as Divine, as a partial disclosure of the Divine Majesty not directly 
intelligible by man (comp. Ex. xxxiii. 18 ff). In this relation it is of 
interest to notice that while St John’s Gospel is, in one aspect, a record of 
the unfolding of the Divine Glory in Christ, there is no mention of Glory 
in his Epistles. This is the more remarkable since the idea of Glory is 
found in the Apocalypse and in all the other Epistles except that to 
Philemon. 


245 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 
