The issue of such denial is near-sightedness, 
seeing only the things that arenear. This issues 
in lust. And lust brings forth death. 

The note of the letter is one of great solemnity, 
I had almost said severity ; but it is the severity 
of a great love and a great desire for the strength- 
ening of believers. Let us ever hear its great 
words to us; In remembrance, give diligence. 
Grace is sufficient; but we must discover and 
obey its laws, or it is valueless. 


THE MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 


A 
THE ESSENTIAL MESSAGE 


I. The Central Teaching. The Life of Fellowship 


explained 


i. As to Resources. 


a. Objective. The Pattern provided, 
1. Of Light. The Sinless One. ii. 6. 
2. Of Love. ‘He loved us.” iv. 10. 
6. Subjective. The Power provided. 
I, For Light. ‘“ Begotten we see.” 
li. 20, 27. 
2. For Love. Begotten we love. iv. 7. 


ii. As to Realization. 


a. Its Value tous. The Fulfillment of Life. 
1. The perfected Being, 
2. The Friendship of God. 
6, Its Value toGod. The Fulfillment of Purpose. 
1. Media of Manifestation. 
{ 2. Instruments of Accomplishment. 


Il. The Abiding Appeal. The Responsibilities of Fei- 


lowship declared 


i, As to Light. 


a. Its Testing must be sought. 
4. Its Revelation must be obeyed. 


ii. As to Love. 


a. Its Impulse must be yielded to. 
6. Its Holiness must be maintained. 


176 


B 
. THE APPLICATION 


I. To the Individual 


Life must be tested 
Light and Love. 


II. To the Church 
The Law of its Fell 
ship is that of Life 
pressed in Love te: 
by Light. 
“Believe not ey 
spirit.” 
“ Look to yourselves.’ 
«* Welcome such.” 


THE MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS 
OF JOHN 


“Be three letters of John are intimately 
related to each other. In the first we 
have teaching, and in the second and 
third, illustrations ; but the message is one. 

| There is, moreover, a close relation between 
these letters and the Gospel according to John. 
Two statements, one in the Gospel, and one in 
the letters, in which the apostle declared the pur- 
pose of his writing in each case, reveal that re- 


' Jation. 


The purpose for which the Gospel was written 
was that those reading it should believe that 
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that as 
a result of their belief, they might themselves 
enter into life. This the writer clearly declared 
in the words, 

“These are written that ye may believe that 
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that be- 
lieving ye may have life in His name” (John 
XX. 31). 

177 


178. MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 


The purpose for which the letters were written 
was that those reading them, having already be- 
lieved on the name of the Son of God, might have 
the means whereby to find assurance of their pos- 
session of eternal life. This with equal clearness 
John declared in the words, 

“These things have I written unto you, that 
ye may know that ye have eternal life, even unto 
you that believe on the name of the Son of God” 
(1 John v. 13). 

In the Gospel, then, we have the unveiling of 
eternal life in its manifestation in the Son of God; 
and the revelation of the fact that this life is, 
through Him, placed at the disposal of men 
through the mystery of His death, and the vic- 
tory of His resurrection. When we read the 
Gospel story, we know what eternal life really is, 
for it is clearly manifested in the Son of God; 
and further, we learn that we may share in that 
life by believing in His name. Thus the theme 
of the Gospel is that of eternal life; as it is 
revealed in the Son of God; and as the Son 
of God is able to communicate it to believing 
souls. 

In the letters, the theme is still that of eternal 
life, only in these we see its manifestation in the 


MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 179 


children of God, that is, in those who through 
faith in the Son of God have received that life. 
So that the theme of the letters is that of eternal 
life, as it is revealed in the children of God, as 
they are under the mastery of the Son of God. 

The theme of the Gospel and the letters is 
thus seen to be the same. It is that of age- 
abiding life, that is, life according to the will 
and purpose of God. In the Gospel we see one 
lonely figure, that of the Son of God, revealing 
and communicating eternal life. In the epistles 
we see the children of God, those whom the Son 
brings into this life, that is all such as believe on 
His name. 

In the prologue of the Gospel, John wrote of 
the Son of God, 

“In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God. 

And the Word became flesh, and dwelt 

among us . . . full of grace and truth” 
(John i. 1 and 14). 

In the parenthesis of the fourteenth verse, 
John, in evident exultation of spirit, wrote, 

-“And we beheld His glory, glory as of the 
only begotten from the Father full of grace and 
truth,” and in that brief and almost abrupt 


180 MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 


phrase, “full of grace and truth,’ he gave the 
distinguishing facts of the “ glory.” 

When we turn to his letters, we find the same 
facts of grace and truth dominating his thought: 
the first of them illustrating the power of grace 
in the life of al! those who believe in the Son of 
God, and the second and third insisting upon 
the importance of truth, by showing the neces- 
sity for loyalty thereto on the part of those who 
share the privileges of grace. 

These letters, then, afford a teaching and a 
test. They teach us what eternal life is in the © 
experience of the child of God; and they enable 
us therefore to test our life, and to know whether 
it is eternal life. 

In dealing with the essential message we find 
that its central teaching is an explanation of 
the life of fellowship; while its abiding appeal 
is that of a declaration of the responsibilities of 
fellowship. 

As we commence our reading of the first 
letter, the word /ellowshzp is found, and it is the 
key-note of the three epistles, the master-thought 
of the writer being that eternal life is life in fel- 
lowship with God ; “we enter upon eternal life 
when we are brought into fellowship with God; 


MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 181 


we continue in eternal life as we abide in fellow- 
ship with God. 

The explanation of the life of fellowship falls 
into two parts, the first dealing with resources, 


and the second with realization. 


The resources of the life of fellowship are 
objectively presented in the pattern provided 
in the Son of God; and subjectively received 
in the power provided when we are begotten 
children of God. 

The pattern of eternal life is given in Christ, 
and the writer dealt with it in its twofold aspect 
of light and of love. 

When dealing with the subject of light, the 
apostle wrote, 

“ He that saith he abideth in Him ought him- 
self to walk even as that One walked” (1 John 
ii. 6). 

It is evident from that literal translation that 
as John wrote, he had before his vision the Lord 
and Master Whom he knew so intimately. If 
we desire an accurate interpretation of the phrase, 
“that One,’ we must go back to the Gospel to 
find it, for there we see the One upon Whom 
John was looking in spirit, and by faith, when 
he wrote the words. In that Gospel the Son of 


182 MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 


God is revealed, walking in light, and, therefore, 
as the sinless One, never consenting to dark- 
ness, never hiding from God, or attempting so 
to do; the One of Whom it was preéminently 
true that in His spirit there was no guile, no 
deceit.’ He is the pattern, therefore, of eternal 
life, as perfect conformity to light. In the meas- 
ure in which we walk as He walked, we walk in 
light. 

It must be remembered that this writing was 
for the children of God, that the Lord Jesus 
Christ is not presented as a pattern to men ~ 
until they have yielded themselves to Him; — 
for the perfection of His life is such that to 
present it as an ideal to be realized would be 
but to mock the impotence of unregenerate men. 
It is perfectly true that we may present Him as 
the great Ideal to men who have not yet re- 
ceived His gift of life; but in doing so we only 
succeed in discovering to them their inability to 
imitate the pattern, and so to reveal to them the 
necessity for the new birth. Having become ~ 
His by the gift of life, we are called upon to 
live the life of fellowship with God, and our first 
resource is that of the pattern which He thus 
presents. 


MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 183 


In dealing with the subject of love, the apostle 
wrote, 

“ Herein is love, not that we loved God, but 
that He loved us, and sent His Son to be the Pro- 
pitiation for our sins” (1 John iv. 10). 

In all the life of the Son of God thus sent by 
the Father there was a revelation of the attitude 
and activity of perfect love. No word ever 
passed His lips but that was love inspired. He 
wrought no deed but in answer to the demand of 
love. Thus in Him we see eternal life in the sin- 
lessness of light, and the selflessness of love. 

If, however, as we have already indicated, our 
resources in Christ are only objective, then we are 
left helpless indeed. The more carefully I con- 
template the revelation of eternal life in Christ, 
the more impossible do I feel it to be to imitate 
the pattern given. Those who speak of imitat- 
ing Jesus Christ, and seem to hope to realize the 
ideal in their own strength, have surely never 
seen Him in that marvellous wonder of perfect 
sinlessness and absolute love which John has 
presented to us in his Gospel. The pattern is not 
enough, and therefore in dealing with our re- 
sources, he shows that Christ is not merely ob- 
jectively presented to us as from without, that we 


184 MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 


may gaze upon Him; but that by the communi- 
cation of His own life to us He becomes a sub- 
jective, an actual power, working within our 
lives. 

This is true both with regard to light and to 
love. The light only comes when comes the life, 
and the love only comes when comes the life. 
When a man is begotten of God, he sees, he be- 
comes sensitive in the matter of sin, he knows 
exactly what he ought to do. Moreover, whena 
man is begotten of God, the first impulse of his 
new life is love, which drives him out upon the 
pathway of sacrificial service on behalf of other 
men. 

The relation of life to light in the case of the 
children of God is revealed in two statements ; 

“Ye have an anointing from the Holy One, and 
ye know all things.” 

“And as for you, the anointing which ye re- 
ceived of Him abideth in you, and ye need not 
that any one teach you; but as His anointing 
teacheth you concerning all things, and is true, 
and is no lie, and even as it taught you, ye abide 
in Him” (1 John ii. 20 and 27). 

While there are many values in these state- 
ments, for the purpose of our present meditation 


MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 185 


we may summarize their teaching in this respect 
by saying that the child of God is never left in 
doubt by God as to the thing which is sinful, and 
the thing which isright. That statement may be 
challenged, but let it be carefully pondered in the 
light of Christian experience. There are times 
when we may be tempted to argue with ourselves 
that we are not sure; but in the deepest fact of 
our life in Christ we always know. As we have 
received His life, that life is always light, and 
though there may be moments when on some 
threshold between light and darkness we waver 
and wonder, that very uncertainty does but dem- 
onstrate the necessity for fleeing the danger, and 
pressing back into the clear light. The man be- 
gotten of God sees, and if we are conscious of the 
Joss of a keen sense of sin, we may know that 
our life is at a low ebb. 

The relation of life to love in the case of the 
children of God is revealed in the words ; 

‘Every one that loveth is begotten of God, and 
knoweth God ” (1 John iv. 7). 

The man begotten of God loves. That is the 
very essence of Christianity. The first movement 
in the soul of a man born of God is a movement 
inspired by love and impelling to service. Let 


186 MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 


that be illustrated in the simplest possible way. 
Here is a man born again in some service, or, it 
may be, in the loneliness of hisown home. Then 
immediately, and withoutany exception, he thinks 
of some one else whom he loves, and desires that 
such an one may share his joy; and is conse- 
quently impelled to go and tell that one the 
secret of his new-found life. There is no excep- 
tion to this. The life of God is love, and the 
moment we share it, we love. We may quench 
love, be afraid to let it lead us to full expression, 
but all such action reacts upon life itself. The 
truth of infinite value is that the most loveless 
become love mastered as they are born of God. 

These writings reveal not the resources of life 
alone, but also the values of its realization. 
These are twofold, the value to us, and the value 
to God. 

~ The value of the life of fellowship to us is that 
of the realization of our own life, the perfection of 
our being, in friendship with God. 

Some time ago I received a letter, in which the 
writer said, ‘‘How am I to find the secret that 
will admit me to the realization of all of which I 
am conscious? Life seems to me as though it 
ought to be made up of love and laughter, but I 


MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 187 


am afraid that this is an improper definition of 
life.’ In answer to that letter I said that such is 
life indeed, according to the will of God, and that 
life only becomes love and laughter as it is 
eternal life, or life in fellowship with God. It is 
self-evident that when I use the word laughter I 
am not referring to such laughter as the preacher 
described in the book of Ecclesiastes, when he 
wrote, 

“For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, 

so is the laughter of the fool: this also is vanity ” 
(vii. 6). 
» I refer rather to that exultant hilarity which 
results from full consciousness of life. When a 
man is born of God, he is made to realize what 
God meant when He first made man. That is 
eternal life. 

That way of stating the fact may surprise a 
great many truly Christian people who seem to 
have an idea that eternal life changes a man into 
some other order of being. Let us ever care- 
fully remember that what we are essentially, in 
our first creation, we are by the will and power 
of God. He creates each human being a mem- 
' ber of the great commonwealth of humanity, 
necessary for the perfecting of the whole. We 


188 MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 


never come to a realization of these powers, or 
_make our contribution to the larger whole, until 
we are living eternal life, that is, life in fellow- 
ship with God. The words of Jesus are most 
significant in this respect, in which He declares, 
“ Whosoever loseth his life shall find 2¢,” that is, 
the very life he loses. He that loses his life for 
Christ’s sake does not find a different life. He 
finds rather the key to his own life, which un- 
locks its secrets; and the power which enables 
him to realize its potentialities. The value of 
eternal life to us then is the perfecting of our 
personalities in friendship with God, according 
to the will of God. Eternal life is true life, life 
as God intended it should be. 

Realization of eternal life by the children of 
God is valuable to God Himself, in that He finds 
in every human being who lives in fellowship 
with Himself a medium through which He can 
manifest Himself, and an instrument through 
which He is able to accomplish His purposes. 
When a man begins to live the life eternal, God 
gains in him an opportunity to show Himself in 
the shop or the office where he works, in the circle 
of men and women among whom he moves. 

The abiding appeal of these letters consists in 


MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 189 


their declaration of the responsibilities of the life 
of fellowship. These responsibilities are those of 
light and love. 

With regard to light, the first responsibility is 
that its testing must be sought. It is not enough 
that I should say that light must be obeyed. 
Our first duty is to seek the light. We often 
say that we have no light on a given subject. 
Let it be remembered that if that is so, the fault 
is with us. We can have light if we will. That 
fact is most clearly taught by Paul in one of his 
letters, in which he said, “ Awake, thou that 
sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ 
shali shine upon thee.” This does not merely 
mean once, at the beginning, but along the 
whole pathway of life. It is possible for us not 
to seek the light, not to want to have the light, 
not to desire its shining ; and our first responsi- 
bility therefore is that we do seek the light. If 
indeed we bear His name and profess to live the 
life of fellowship, we have no right to undertake 
any business without seeking light, no right to 
enter upon any pleasure without desiring to 
know His will. There must be the testing of 
the life by light on the part of all those who are 
living in fellowship with God. 


190 MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 


Then when the light shines, it must be obeyed 
wherever it leads, and at whatever cost. 

Our responsibilities as to love are that its im- 
pulse must be yielded to, and its holiness must 
be maintained. 

It is a matter for the most solemn considera- 
tion that we may destroy our capacity for love 
by not yielding to its impulse. There is a time 
in the earlier experiences of all Christian life 
when the soul is conscious of a great passion for 
lost men and women. It is possible to lose this. 
It is possible to continue the service, and yet to 
have lost the love. We lose the love impulse 
when we refuse to obey its suggestions. Love 
asks for some sacrificial service, and we listen to 
some calm, calculating, satanic voice, and caring 
for ourselves, we stifle love. If the life of God 
in the soul of a man is in its first movement an 
impulse of love, our first responsibility is that 
of obedience thereto. Love will lead us to the 
doing of such things that the world will be un- 
able to understand. Judas will still inquire, 
“Why this waste?” If we listen to that criti- 
cism, and cease to respond to love, love will 
die. If we turn a deaf ear to such suggestions 
of Satan, and yielding ourselves to love, serve 


MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 191 


in answer to its impulse, love will deepen and 
intensify. 

We are not only to yield to love; we are to 
guard its holiness. It is possible to be led astray 
from the activity of true love by yielding to a 
false charity. At the very centre of love is light. 
That is not true love which sacrifices principle. 
God has never acted in love at the expense of 
light. If I could be persuaded for one moment 
that God can be so loving as to pass lightly over 
sin, then I should feel that the government of the 
universe was insecure. The fact is otherwise. 
He loves with such intensity that He never can 
excuse sin. In all our love, therefore, we must 
see to it that the light is shining, and that holi- 
ness is maintained. 

These letters have an immediate application 
to the individual and to the Church. That to 
the individual may thus be briefly stated. Life 
must be tested by light and by love. That isa 
word full of solemnity. We talk of our fellow- 
ship with God. How are we to prove to our- 
selves that we are really living in fellowship with 
Him? The test of the life is that of light and 
love. If the light is not shining clearly, or if 
shining, we are disobedient to it; if the love that 


192 MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 


once burned and inspired is no longer operative, 
then may God deliver us from mere satisfac- 
tion with the formulz of orthodoxy, or correct 
intellectual apprehensions of the doctrines of 
grace. . 

As to the Church, the law of its fellowship is 
life, and as in the case of the individual, life must 
be tested by light and by love. We have no 
right to be so broad in our Church fellowship as 
to receive men who deny Christ as He is pre- 
sented in the Gospel, and as He has accomplished 
His victories in the souls of men in the centuries 
of the Christian era. We may respect the con- 
victions of these men, but there can be no fellow- 
ship with them in Church life, which does not 
weaken the testimony of the Church. It would 
be infinitely better that the fellowship of any 
Church should be smaller than that its num- 
bers should be enlarged by the inclusion of 
those who fail to walk in light, or to respond to 
love. 

It is a remarkable fact and not to be lightly 
passed over, that in these writings of John, who 
has become known preéminently as the apostle 
of love, we find the sternest words as to the 
necessity for loyalty to truth; and the Church of 


MESSAGE OF THE LETTERS OF JOHN 193 


God needs to remember that fellowship with God 
necessitates separation from all who fail to fulfill 
the responsibilities of fellowship in light, or in 
love. 


THE MESSAGE OF JUDE 


A B 
THE ESSENTIAL MESSAGE THE APPLICATIC 
I. The Central Teaching. The Peril of Apostasy 1. To the Church 
i. Apostasy defined. The Faith fory 
a. Its Character. (Verse 4.) we are tocon 
6. Its Characteristics. (Verses 12, 16, 19.) i, The System of T 
ii. Illustrations of its Nature and Issue. ii, That. Truth ce 
a, Israel. Unbelief. Destruction. in a Person. 
6. Angels. Rebellion. Kept in Bonds. ie 
c. Sodom and Fornication. Age-abiding Fire. ah iglee: oR 
Gomorrah. a 
a, Cain. Self-righteousness, 
e. Balaam. Greed. 
J. Korah. Presumption. 
NoreE.—All these contrary to Faith. 
II. The Abiding Appeal 
i, The inclusive Command. (Verse 3.) Hl. To the Individu: 
a. Passionate and determined Effort. The Conte: 
6. The Abandon and Cautiousness of the Athlete. . which def 
(Verses 20-23.) the Truth. 
ii. The Exposition. alee i. Constant Loyal 
a. Keep yourselves. re ii. Ceaseless Caute 
Tocbne. iii, Courageous Cc 
b. “Some.” ... dence. 


