ἯΙ 
APO Ἐμοῦ 
eh Nett ten a ls 


ae 
ΡΝ 


Darras an ἢν 
Das 








8. 1024 074 296 629 


Cornell University 


Library 





The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 


There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 


https://archive.org/details/cu31924074296629 


In compliance with current 
copyright law, Cornell University 
Library produced this 
replacement volume on paper 
that meets the ANSI Standard 
239 .48-1984 to replace the 
irreparably deteriorated original. 


1993 


THE EPISTLES OF ST JOHN. 








ΒΥ 


BROOKE FOSS WESTCOTT, D.D., D.C.L., 


BISHOP OF DURHAM, 


HONORARY FELLOW OF TRINITY AND KING’S COLLEGES, CAMBRIDGE. 


THIRD EDITION. 


Cambridge and London: 
MACMILLAN AND CO. 


1892 





Kal τὸ Πνεῦῖμὰ καὶ ἡ Νύμφη λέγογειν Ἔρχου. 
Kal ὁ ἀκούων εἰπάτω Ἔρχου. 

Kal ὁ διψῶν ἐρχέοθω, 

6 θέλων λαβέτω ὕδωρ Ζωῆς λωρεᾶν. 


A poe, xxii. 


First Edition printed 1883, Second 1885, Third 1892. 


17. 


1 the present Commentary I have endeavoured to follow 
the plan which I sketched in the notes on the Gospel of 
St John in The Speaker's Commentary. It formed no part of 
my design to collect and discuss the conflicting opinions which 
have been held on the structure of the writings or on the 
interpretation of separate passages. Such a labour is indeed 
of the deepest interest and utility; but it appeared to me 
that I might help the student more by giving the results at 
which I have arrived, and by indicating the lines of inquiry 
by which they have been reached. In pursuing this end it 
has been my main desire to call attention to the minutest 
points of language, construction, order, as serving to illustrate 
the meaning of St John. I do not venture to pronounce that 
any variation is trivial or unimportant. The exact words are 
for us. the decisive expression of the Apostle’s thought. I 
have therefore, if I may borrow words which have been applied 
in a somewhat different sense, begun by interpreting the 
Epistles as I should ‘interpret any other book’, neglecting 
nothing which might contribute to a right apprehension of 
its full meaning. I do not feel at liberty to set aside the 
letter of a document till it has been found to be untenable. 
Many writings, it is true, will not bear the consistent 


application of such a method of interpretation; but each 


vi 


day’s study brings home to me more forcibly the conviction 
that in no other way can we hope to gain the living truth 
of apostolic teaching. The verification of the method lies in 
the result. If it discloses to patient investigation unsuspected 
harmonies and correspondences of thought: if it suggests 
good reasons for holding that views of faith which seem to be 
conflicting are really complementary: if it inspires with a vital 
power dogmatic statements which grow rigid by the necessi- 
ties of controversy: if it opens on this side and that subjects 
of study which await fuller investigation: if it enables us 
to feel that the difficulties of our own time were not unnoticed 
by those who, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, saw the 
Eternal: if it brings a sense of rest and confidence which grows 
firmer with increasing knowledge: then it seems to me that 
it needs no further justification. 

It cannot but be that I have often erred in the applica- 
tion of the principles which I hold; but no one, I trust, will 
condemn the method till he has tested it by personal labour. 
A few hours spent in tracing out the use of a word or a 
form, in comparing phrases often held to be synonymous, in 
‘estimating the force of different tenses of the same verb in 
regard’ to the contexts in which they are found, will bring 
assurance which no acceptance of another's work can give. 
Several notes in which I have sought to bring together materials 
serviceable for such inquiries will at least, I hope, encourage 
some to make the trial for themselves. 

The study of Scripture is, I believe, for us the way by 
which God will enable us to understand His present revelation 
through history and nature. When once we can feel the 
divine power of human words, which gather in themselves 
the results of cycles of intellectual discipline, we shall be pre- 
pared to pass from the study of one book to the study of 
‘the Divine Library’. And the inquiries which thus come 


vil 

before us are not mere literary speculations. The fulness of 
the Bible, apprehended in its historical development, answers 
to the fulness of life. If we can come to see in it the variety, 
the breadth, the patience of the past dealings of God with 
humanity, we shall gain that courageous faith from a view 
of the whole world which is commonly sought by confining 
our attention to a little fragment of it. 

The Bible is indeed the symbol and the pledge of the 
Catholicity of our Faith; and the real understanding of the 
Bible rests upon the acknowledgment of its Catholicity, of the 
universal range in which it includes in its records typical 
examples of the dealings of God with men under every variety 
of circumstance and being, social and personal. We are all so 
familiar with certain lessons which the Bible contains that we 
come to regard them, perhaps unconsciously, as the complete 
sum of its teaching. Special words, phrases, incidents, inspire 
our own souls and mould our own faith, and we forget that 
we are not the measure of the wants and powers of man. So 
it is that we pass over large sections of Scripture unstudied, 
or force them into unison with what we hear most easily. 
We neglect to take account of periods of silence in revelation 
scarcely less eloquent with instruction than the messages of 
prophets. We lose just those helps to knowing how God 
disciplines races, classes, individuals, who are most unlike 
ourselves, which we need sorest when we look on the sad 
spectacle of a disordered and divided world. 

This Catholicity of the Bible is made more impressive by the 
fact that the Bible is in a large degree historical. It has pleased 
God to reveal Himself in and through life; and the record of 
the revelation is literary and not dogmatic. From first to last 
God is seen in the Bible conversing with man. He speaks to 
man as man can hear, and man replies as he can use the gift of 
the Spirit. But word and answer alike are according to the 


vill 

truth of life. All that has been written for us has been part of 
real human experience, and therefore it has an unending value. 
Thus in the main the Bible is the continuous unfolding in 
mauy parts and many ways of the spiritual progress of mankind. 
It may be a law, a narrative, a prophecy, a psalm, a proverb, 
but in each case it comes from life and enters into life; it 
belongs to a distinct epoch ; it is only in its vital context, so 
to speak, that it can be perfectly understood. 

In this long series of spiritual records the first Epistle of St 
John probably holds the ‘last place. It is probably the final 
interpretation of the whole series of the divine revelations; and 
under this aspect it proclaims and satisfies the highest hope of 
man. It declares that in the Presence of Christ there has been 
given and there will be given that knowledge of God for which 
man was made, issuing in fellowship which is realised here in 
the Christian Society, and which reaches to the Source of all 
life. In this consummation the past finds accomplishment, and 
the sufferings and riddles of the present are shewn to be part of 
a sovereign counsel which passes beyond our sight. As we look 
back and look forward in the light thus thrown over the world 
we can work and wait. 

The Son of God is come and hath given us an understanding 
that we may know Him that ts true, and we are in Him that ts 
true, even in His Son Jesus Christ. 

That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you also, 
that ye also may have fellowship with us: yea, and our fellowship 
ἴδ with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ. 


Though I am quite unable to acknowledge or even to dis- 
tinguish in detail my obligations to earlier writers in the course 
of a work which has been spread over more than thirty ycars, 


I cannot refrain from expressing my gratitude to three com- 


ix 

mentators who have helped me greatly in different ways. 
Bengel’s notes always serve as a kind of standard of spiritual 
insight ; and there is no one from whom I differ on a serious 
question of interpretation with more regret or more misgiving. 
Huther (4th edition, 1880) has given a most careful review of 
the opinions of previous editors to which I have been much 
indebted in revising my own notes. And Haupt has drawn 
at length a connected view of the Epistle which brings out into 
a clear light its theological significance. On many points of 
importance I am unable to accept his conclusions, but no one, I 
think, has shewn more impressively the true spirit of an inter- 
preter of the New Testament. 


There is a feeling of sadness in looking at that which must 
stand with all its imperfections as the accomplishment of a 
dream of early youth. The work might have answered better 
to the opportunity. But however greatly I have failed in other 
respects, I trust that at least I may have been allowed to en- 
courage some students to linger with more devout patience, with 
more frank questionings than before, over words of St JoHN. 


CaMBRIDGE, 
June 22, 1883. 


NOTICE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 


THE truest gratitude which a writer can shew to his critics is, 
I think, to consider their criticisms silently and without the 
semblance of controversy or excuse to remove the faults which 
he is led to feel. On one criticism however which has been made 
on this volume I wish to offer a few words of explanation, lest 
I should seem to accept the assumption on which it rests. 
Several reviewers who have appreciated the work most gener- 
ously have spoken of the Essays, ‘as only loosely connected,’ with 
the Commentary. I can only say that in my conception they 
are an essential part of it, and that as far as they appear to be 
merely accidental additions I have failed to make my purpose 
clear. If indeed I had regarded the Apostolic writings as 
addressed simply to the first age, it might have been enough to 
ascertain their literal meaning without touching on the problems 
of our own time as they are affected by them. But I believe 
that they still have a living voice for ourselves; and I have 
endeavoured to indicate how we may interpret it. From the 
earliest time when I read the first Epistle of St John as a 
divine instruction for today Ε could not but ask What then is 
the world? and What scope is left for Art? The questions 
appeared to me to be of the highest practical importance. 1 
could not have written a Commentary on the Epistle without 
striving to answer them, without having gained answers which 
were at least satisfactory to myself. And yet again: the charac- 
teristic revelation of the Epistle is ‘God is love’. How, untold’ 
thousands have sadly inquired, can such a revelation be main- 


ΧΙ 


tained in face of the facts of life? ‘The Gospel of Creation’ 
points, I think, to the solution of this last enigma of our being. 

I cannot suppose that my own experience in reading St 
John is in any way singular. I hope then that I have said 
enough to shew that the Essays are indeed most closely united 
with a living interpretation of his Epistles. We can each speak 
only as we feel. For others the same words may have other - 
lessons. 


In revising the notes I have made some transpositions 
which will, I trust, give greater coherence and clearness to 
them. For the same reason I have added a continuous trans- 
lation to each section. In the interpretation of the Epistles I 
have not made any changes. 

I have to thank many friends, old and new, for corrections of 
references. It is only by such generous help that approximate 
correctness can be gained. 


_ B. EF. W. 
CAMBRIDGE, 
Oct. 10, 1885. 


NOTICE TO THE THIRD EDITION. 


Some corrections have been made in the third edition, 
chiefly in references, for which I have to thank my very old 
friend Dr C. J. Beard of Shepherd’s Bush, and a young friend 
the Rev. H. A. M. Brooksbank, of Adelaide, who have spared no 


pains to remove the errors which remained in the last edition. 


B. Ε Ὁ. 
AUCKLAND CASTLE, 
March 4, 1892. 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE. PAGE 
LOGE cacascveusaaasiedeseensuad aa aseiaeii th sadacbseusadwinvediansaioes xvii 
Dae: cas caruasest ane cite δῖ ρος Sustatesueyeeuade ce ietee ae tanieee XXVili 
OPM sy sssios seeioes Uuouu rere twesswaveco a eeeeneainei teenie ween ees Xxix 
Authorship, Date, Place of writing isceccccsssseeeeeereees XXX 
DOSEN ON 23.0 sr te Sasa coaseiea absumndaetendeneseuenesdssmiese xs xxxii 
CHAU sowvsscawiwevscaviaee ceeasade cate oa nedcsvacedanceassaen’ Xxxili 
Oj Cth a 2se2 sade τι υ θυ wesuncitediine dneiyecuten Gagdoccwmabeeaees XXXVili 
Style and Language «...0.οὐενινονουςευςςονονυνονος ςορτοννντος XXKix 
The Epistles and the Gospel ..........ccsssssseeeseseceeseves sliii 
PUN ΜΉ ΉΒ ΤΠ ἢ ΧΙνὶ 


LOGE ΝΠ ΠΤ li 
AUhOrships.aceseisisesans cacasunsgsvanavienvsanesescausaeeeaenenens liii 
(θα yds se duadaet'edonexeawsqeseteens ibe lvi 


FIRST EPISTLE: TEXT AND NOTES. 


Cuap. 


CHap. 


πα sates 3 
The Fatherhood of God ........cccccscccecseseesssseencesseseeneaees 27 
The idea of Christ's Blood in the New Testament ......... 34 
The idea of Sim im St Johni.cccccccccoccccceccecceceeeeneeesees 37 
ἜΝ ΠΥ ΤΠἘΠ ΡΨ ΠΤ 41 
The use of the word ἵλασμός....«.«οννννονον  οννννννεννονενννννονοον 85 
The site Of Matisscccovsaswxsesanscnsesswisseves epeassasereeecancaes’ 87 
The powers Of Ἰδοῦδ o.sessvissesinsosavasceveineiarvassyviads oa ρον ρος 89 
St John’s teaching on creation ......ὑννννννννννννννννοννννννννννον go 
ANTONIE eine ares govddadasdccaisudessesnned teuaawdechotareenetednesesene 92 


χὶν Contents. 

PAGE 
CHADS Bie! Sedieic cakes veiauauisan in windvien aoeicaunan vet caaeaende sited ΠΡ 95 
Children: of COM rscuscssiosnecevosseecosim wampenemnyys Hiabeat nese 122 
Aspects of the Πισαγηναξζογι.......ψΨ.νννννννννννννννννννν κε κετνστνονν 124 
Pitles: of Oelveversreseussens sannucene vara gegeans ἐν οτος ἐρενοοοιςουκόκωον 128 
On the idea ΟΜ πσσσ΄᾿΄- 130 
Phe native Of Md itesaccnemavescasaents aptaeeesvs: sin soatennantennnns 134 
The Names of the Lord .....0....ccccccccccecee cence ete eeetenete es 136 
CRABS AY: nine ves cineernan base nde scence nneseueuaniyaameaeamaeies acieagaer means 139 
OR: TRO TODAY ρρρφρὁΨἍσ.ΟΟεε.ε.«ἍΨἍ«Ψ«ἍΨ«ΨΨ 163 
Phe revelation Of G00 ccscvgecascwssevaicagenaiiag ixeageowsacs vices 166 
The use of the term μονογενής ..---..ἀτνννννννννννννννενενννενεννν 169 
The use of θεός and ὁ θεός .........ὑνννοννννννονννννν νιν νννννννςς 172 
Did: MOUOWSNP: wc acesaran dan cenaassaesrenctaerssonlactaedsdabenass 174 
CRIA Bis NS. as ataacsicen Sikes d tala cliacaitnede Naas Saleem sewnNasel teemaasees wanes 176 
The use of the term ‘the Christ? .....0..ccceccsececseeeeeeeeeeees 198 
References to the facts of the Gospel .........csecccseeeeeennees 200 
On thé PEAATIGS Wh Vi © fo sasconsnoscsen sanzanes wesasenetuars vaeenes 201 
On the readings tn V. 7b. ..ccesceecceseeeeesecceeeeceeenenesetees 202 
ISU MOTO. CE GETE «ach cecilia hyena έΠέ natalae a petaanehedts 209 
Phe ted Of LAGE:  ῖἩἋ᾿ᾶυἭνυ ς.ἈἐςἋὨ ὈὈὈὈὈὌὌἬἬ 214 
{TRE CPUC GOW” saissveece ctu ssaiien' ionaaisain wanda ncaietedasy caodiewtes 218 
SECOND EPISTLE: TEXT AND NOTES .o.cceccccicccneeeeteeeeees 223 
THIRD EPISTLE: TEXT AND NOTES 0....0....c00..ccccccccee eens 235 
The: Divine Name rvcccanvocrsenianasets vives Mtauwesavtnnasdsavcavesees 243 

1. THE TWO EMPIRES: THE CHURCH AND THE 
WO TTA Dy asses oor daa aaa ga nee aes alana tos Catena ena Gatsade tat 249 
Il. THE GOSPEL OF CREATION . τ cece ccc cece 285 
III. THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART......... 331 


INTRODUCTION 
TO THE FIRST EPISTLE. 


I. TEXT. 


THE text of the Epistle is contained in the following authorities: Authori- 


ties in 
1. Greek MSS. which the 
ξ ἢ Epistle is 
(a) Primary uncials : ΦΕΡ πε 


x, Cod. Sin. see. Iv. 

A, Cod. Alex. sec. v. 

B, Cod. Vatic. see. Iv. 

C, Cod. Ephr. 5886. v. from i. 1—iv. 2 ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ. 


Secondary uncials : 
K, Cod. Mosq. see. Ix. 
L, Cod. Angel. see. Ix. 
P, Cod. Porphyr. 5886. 1x. 
(8) Cursives. More than two hundred in number, including 
13 (Cod. Colbert. sec. x1.=33 Gosp.), and 31 (Cod. 
Leicestr. sec. XIV. = 69 Gosp.). 

D, Codex Bez, sec. vi., has lost 67 leaves after Mark xvi. 15 
(Gk.), in which there can be no doubt that the Epistle was con- 
tained, for after this gap follows the Latin translation of 3 John 
11—15. The Book of the Acts comes immediately afterwards. 


2. VERSIONS. 
(a) Latin. Old Latin. 
A large and important fragment, iii, 8—end, has 
been published by L. Ziegler (1876) from a 
Munich MS. (cent. vit.), which gives an African 
text closely akin to that of Fulgentius (quoted as 
F or Fris.). 


XV 


Character 
of the text. 


Collation 
with 
Stephens, 
1550. 


TEXT. 


A nearly complete text of a different (Italic?) 
type has been preserved by Augustine in his 
Expository discourses on the Epistle (i. r—v. 12). 
Many other fragments are preserved in quota- 


tions. 
Vulgate Latin (V. lat.vg and vg). 
(8) Syriac. 
Peshato (syr. vg). 
Harclean (syr. hl). 


(y) Lgyptian. 
Memphitic (Coptic) (me). 
Thebaic (Sahidic) (the). 
To these may be added the Armenian and the dithiopic'. 


The text does not present many difficult problems (ii. 20; iv. 3; 
v. 10). It was exposed to far fewer disturbing influences than that 
of the Gospels. There were no parallel texts or parallel traditions 
at hand (unless probably in iv. 3) to supply additions to the 
original words, or modifications of their form. The utmost amount 
of variation likely to find favour with critics of the most opposite 
schools is practically of very small extent, and, though no variation 
is without real significance, of comparatively small moment. 

In the following table I have set down all the changes from the 
text of Stephens (1550) which I have adopted generally in accord- 
ance with the clear balance of the most ancient authority. The 
reader will be able to judge of their importance. 

i 3 add καὶ ὑμῖν, also to you (4. ΒΟ). 
4 γρ. ἡμεῖς, write we (NA*B), for yp. ὑμῖν, we write fo you. 
ἡ X- ἡμῶν, our joy (XB), for 7 x. ὑμῶν (AC), your joy (doubtful). 
5 ἔστιν αὕτη (NBC), for αὕτη ἐστίν (A). 
ἀγγελία, message (NAB), for ἐπαγγελία (C), promise. 
11 have given below the text a mary, though it shews clearly the 
fairly complete view of the readings of sources of the later texts, cannot su- 


the primary uncials and of the most _persede the study of a full apparatus 
ancient versions, but this limited sum- _criticus. 


1. 


lil. 


I oa N 


14 
18 


19 


20 


23 


24 
27 


28 


19 


TEXT. 


οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ (B), for ἐν αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔστιν (NAC). 

Ἰησοῦ, Jesus (NBC), omit Χριστοῦ, Christ. 

add ὅτι΄ ἔγνωκα (NAB). 

om, ovrws’ περιπ. (AB) to walk, for so to walk. 

ἀγαπητοί, Beloved (RABC), for ἀδελφοί, Brethren. 

om. ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς (2°) (SABC), ye heard, for ye heard from the 
beginning. 

ἔγραψα, I wrote (SABC), for γράφω, I write. 

om. 6° ἀντίχριστος (X* BC). 

ἐξ ἡμῶν ἦσαν (BC), for ἦσαν ἐξ ἡμῶν. 

οἴδατε πάντες (B), ye all know, for καὶ οἴδατε πάντα, and ye 
know all things (doubtful). 

add ὁ ὁμολογῶν τὸν υἱὸν καὶ τὸν πατέρα ἔχει (RABC), he that 
confesseth the Son hath the Father also. 

om. οὖν (NABC), therefore. 

μένει ἐν ὑμῖν (N(A)BC), for ἐν ὑμῖν μένει. 

τὸ αὐτοῦ χρίσμα (() ΒΟ), his unction, for τὸ αὐτὸ xp. the same 
unction. 

μένετε (()4. ΒΟ), abide, for μενεῖτε, ye shall abide. 

ἐάν (ΝΑ ΒΟ), if he shall, for ὅταν, when he shall. 

σχῶμεν (SABC), for ἔχωμεν. 

add καὶ ἐσμέν (RABC), and such we are. 

om. δέ (RABC), but. 

om. ἡμῶν (AB), sins, for owr sins. 

om. μου (SABC), brethren, for my brethren. 

om. τὸν ἀδελφόν (NAB), he that loveth not, for he that loveth 
not his brother. 

θεῖναι (RABC) for τιθέναι. 

om. μου (SABC), little children, for my little children. 

add τῇ΄ γλώσσῃ (ABC). 

add év’ ἔργῳ (NABC). 

ἐν τούτῳ γνωσόμεθα (om. καὶ AB, γνωσόμεθα XABC), in this 
we shall perceive, for and in this we perceive. 

τὴν καρδίαν (A*B), our heart, for τὰς x. our hearts. 


xix 


xx 


lv. 


II 


13 


15 


18 


20 


21 


TEXT. 


om. ἡμῶν (twice) (1. AB, 2. BC). 

ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ (SABC) for zap’ αὐτοῦ. 

om. Χριστὸν ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα (AB), Christ come in flesh. 

ἠγαπήκαμεν (B), have loved, for ἠγαπήσαμεν, loved (doubtful). 

ἐν ἡμῖν ἐστίν (SB) for ἐστὶν ἐν ἡμῖν. 

add Χριστὸς (B), Christ (doubtful). 

add μένει (NB), God abideth (doubtful). 

om. αὐτόν (AB), we love, for we love him. 

ov (XB) for πώς, cannot love, for how can he love? 

om. καί (B), also. 

ποιῶμεν (B), do, for τηρῶμεν, observe. 

τίς ἐστιν δέ (B), but who is? for who is? (doubtful). 

om. ὁ (NAB), Jesus Christ, for Jesus the Christ. 

add év’ τῷ αἷμ. and in the blood, for and the blood. 

7 om. ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ...ἐν τῇ γῇ (RAB), in heaven, the Father, the 

Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. And 

there are three that bear witness in earth. 

ὅτι (NAB), that, for qv, which. 

αὐτῷ or αὐτῷ for ἑαυτῷ. ee 

5 θεὸς ἡμῖν (B), for ἡμῖν ὁ θεός. 

ἵνα.. αἰώνιον, τοῖς πιστ...θεοῦ (N*B) for τοῖς πιστ...θεοῦ, ἵνα 
...alwvov, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, even 
unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God, for 
unto you...God, that ye may...life. 

om. καὶ iva πιστ. εἰς τὸ ὄν. τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ (RAB), and that 
ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. 

ὃ ἐάν for ὃ av. 

ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ (XB) for παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ, 

τηρεῖ αὐτόν (A*B), keepeth him, for τηρεῖ ἑαυτόν, keepeth 
himself. ' 

γινώσκομεν (NAB) for γινώσκωμεν. 

om. 7 (SAB). 

ἑαυτά (8*B) for ἑαυτούς. 

om. ᾿Αμήν (NAB). 


TEXT. 


To these may be added a few variations which are more or less 
probable : 
ll. 2 μόνων (B) for μόνον. 

το οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ (order) (NAC). 

25 ὑμῖν (B) for ἡμῖν. 

29 add καὶ πᾶς (RAC). 
iii, 7 παιδία (AC) τεκνία. 

23 πιστεύωμεν (NAC) for πιστεύσωμεν. 
iv. 2 ἐληλυθέναι (Β) for ἐληλυθότα. 

3 λύει for μὴ ὁμολογεῖ. 

v. 6 μόνῳ (B) for μόνον. 

In v. 10 it may be questioned whether ὁ μὴ πιστεύων should not 
stand absolutely, τῷ θεῷ and τῷ υἱῷ being two attempts to define the 


sense, 


It will be seen that there is in the majority of cases a clear 
preponderance if not a complete agreement of the most ancient 
Greek MSS. for the reading adopted. The mass of later Greek 
MSS. give in most cases the reading which is rejected, but not 
unfrequently they are fairly divided between the rival readings 
(e.g. il. 4, 7, 13, 23, 243 ili, τ, 13, 16, &c.). The reading of the 
most ancient Greek MSS. is generally supported by important 
representatives of the early versions and by some later MSS. But 
in a very few cases a reading is taken on small ancient authority 
alone which would be inadequate if the reading were considered 
by itself (iv. 10, 15 ; v. 5). 

But not to enter now into the details of evidence it will be 
obvious upon a consideration of the contexts that the most ancient 
reading gives in very many cases that shade of colouring to the 
passage which at once approves itself to be original (6. σ. i. 7; ii. 7, 
19, 27; iii. 1, 2, 5, 14; iv. 3, 19; v. 6, 18). In other cases the 
most ancient reading easily explains the origin of the recent reading 
while the converse change is unintelligible (e.g. ii. 235 v. 13; see 


also i. 4, 5; ii. 4, 13, 18, 20, 24, 27, 28; iii, 13, 18; v. 2, 9). In 


ΧΧῚ 


Superior- 
ity of the 
most an- 

cient text. 


Xxil TEXT. 


one place only (iv. 20) does the reading of the more recent type of 
Greek MSS. appear at first sight to be intrinsically more likely. 

The variants offer good examples of conflate readings (il. 15 τοῦ 
θεοῦ καὶ πατρός; comp. 3 John 12 ὑπὸ αὐτῆς τῆς ἐκκλησίας καὶ τῆς 
ἀληθείας) ; of omissions by homeoteleuton (ii. 27 £.; ἵν. 6, 21; ν. 2 ἢ; 
and especially ii. 23); of the addition and omission of the final n, 
represented by a line over the vowel (ii. 13, 14); of 2tacism (iv. 2). 

The text of The text of B is, as elsewhere, of paramount excellence. It 


Cod. Vat. c : 
B. appears to be in error in very few cases : 


i 2 δ΄ ἑωράκαμεν. 
ii, 14 τὸ ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς. 

25 ὑμῖν, comp. iii. 1. 

27 χάρισμα. 
iii. 21 ἔχει. 
Some of the readings which it gives are more or less doubtful : 
ii. 2 μόνων. Comp. v. 6. 

14 om. τοῦ θεοῦ. 

24 om. ἐν before τῷ πατρί. 

27 ἀλλά for ἀλλ᾽ ὡς. 

“29 om. καί. 
ili. 15 ἑαυτοῦ for αὐτοῦ. 

23 πιστεύσωμεν. 
iv. 2 ἐληλυθέναι. 

10 ἠγαπήκαμεν. 

15 add Χριστός. 
v. κα τίς ἐστιν δέ. 

6 μόνῳ. Comp. ii. 2. 
It is not, as far as I can judge, ever in error (unless in iii. 7) 
when it is supported by some other primary uncial or version : 

i. δ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ B 13 31 syr.vg me the. 
ii, 6 om. οὕτως AB syr.vg latt the. 

20 om. καί (2°) B the. 

πάντες NB the. 


TEXT. Xx 


ii 5 om. ἡμῶν AB 13 lat. vg syr.hl me. 
1g om. καί (1°) AB lat. vg syr.hl me. 
τὴν καρδίαν A*B syr. vg the. 
21 om. ἡμῶν (1°) AB 13. 
om. ἡμῶν (2°) BC. 
iv. 3 om. Xp. ἐν σ. ἐλ. AB lat.vg me. 
12 ἐν ἡμῖν ἐστίν SB. 
19 om. αὐτόν AB (the). 
20 ov δύναται 8B syr.hl the. 
v. £ om. καί (2°) B 13 (lat.vg) the. 
2 ποιῶμεν B lat. vg syr me the. 
18 αὐτόν A*B. 


(iv. 21 is not a case in point.) 


The text of δὲ contains many errors, some of which remain un- The text of 


: A Cod, Sin. 
corrected, and not a few peculiar false readings : XN. 
1. 3 ὃ ἀκηκ. καὶ ἕωρ. καὶ ἀπαγγέλλ. 
5 ἡ απαγγελιας corrected to 7 ἀγάπη τῆς ἐπαγγελίας. 


i. 


ω 


φυλαξωμεν (17 m.). 
4 om. ἐν τούτῳ. 
ἡ GX, τοῦ θεοῦ. 
8 ἀλ. καὶ ἐν. 
Ν nig ν 3 
9 μισῶν, ψευστής ἐστιν καὶ ἐν τ. σκ. 
13 τὸ πονηρόν. Comp. v. 8 τὸν ἀλ. ; ν. I. 
24 ἀκηκόατε (twice). 
ἐν τῷ π. καὶ ἐν τῷ υἱῷ. 
26 ταῦτα δέ. 
2] πνεῦμα (17 m.). 
ἀληθής. 
28 om. καὶ νῦν.. αὐτῷ. 
peer θὲ τ ais Toe ca 
ἐν τῇ παρ. av. ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 
iii, 5 οἴδαμεν. 
> ἡ 5 ᾽ς. αὶ 
οὐκ ἔ. ἐν αὐτῷ. 


14 μεταβέβηκεν. 


XX1V TEXT. 


21 ἀδελφοι. 
22 αἰτώμεθα. 
iv. 2 γινώσκομεν. 
3 op. Ἰησοῦν κύριον. Comp. 1 Cor. xii. 3. 
ὅτι ἀκηκ. ὅτι. 
8 om. 6 μὴ ἀγ....θεόν (τὸ m.): om. τὸν θ. (8°). 
9 ζώμεν. 
17 μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν ἐν ἡμῖν. 
τῇ ἀγάπῃ τῆς κρ. 
ἐσόμεθα. 
20 om. ὅτι. 
Vv. 1 τὸ γεγεννημένον. Comp. v. 20; iL 13. 
οἱ τρεῖς. 
9 τὴν μαρτ. τοῦ θεοῦ (τ᾽ m.). 
10 οὐκ ἐπίστευκεν. 
ἐμαρτύρηκεν. 
20 τὸ ἀληθινόν (17 m.). 
In several cases it has false readings in common with A and 
with C respectively : 
ΝΑ. 
iii, 21 add ἡμῶν after καταγινώσκῃ. 


v. 6 add καὶ πνεύματος after αἵματος. 


i. 9 add ἡμῶν after ἁμαρτίας (2°). 

ii. 6 add οὕτως. 

11. 5 add ἡμῶν after ἁμαρτίας. 
11 ἐπαγγελία. 
13 add καί 
19 add καί. 
21 add quay after καρδία. 

Thetextof | The text of A, which represents a far more ancient type in this 


Cod. Alex. 


A Epistle than in the Gospels, contains many peculiar readings, in 


which it has often the support of the Vulgate : 


TEXT, oe 


i. 6 ἐὰν + yap. 
7 μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ (some lat). 
il. 2 ἐστ. iA. lat. veg. 
8 σκιά. 
ἐν ait. ad. 
27 om. καί before καθώς. 
iii, 20 om. ὅτι 2° lat. vg me the. 
23 τῷ ov. αὐτοῦ 1. X, 
lv. 6 ἐν τούτῳ lat.vg me the. 
7 add τὸν θεόν. 
8 οὐ γινώσκει. 
10 ἐκεῖνος for αὐτός. 
15 ὁμολογῇ. 
16 πιστεύομεν (lat. vg) me. 
1g add οὖν lat. vg. 
ὁ θεός for αὐτός lat.vg. 
21 ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ lat. vg. 
v. 6 πνεύματι for αἵματι. 
10 add τοῦ θεοῦ lat. vg me. 
τῷ υἱῷ lat. vg. 
οὐκ ἐπίστευσεν. 
11 αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ζ. 
14 ὄνομα for θέλημα. 
16 μὴ ἅμαρτ. ἅμ. μὴ πρ. θ. 
20 ἀληθινὸν θεόν lat. vg me. 


om. Ἰησοῦ Χριστῷ lat. vg. 


The peculiar readings of C have no appearance of genuineness: The text of 
5 : com Cod. Eph. 
1, 4 add in fin. ἐν ἡμῖν. C. 

9 om. ἡμᾶς. 
li, 21 om. πᾶν. 
iii. 20 κύριος (for θεός). 
iv. 2 Χριστὸν ᾿Ἰησοῦν. 


W. J. c 


XXV1 TEXT. 


In several places it gives a correction which was adopted widely: 
1. 3.0m. δέ. 
5 ἐπαγγελία. 
ii, = 4.0m. ὅτι, 
11. 14 add τὸν ἀδελφόν. 
The Latin The Vulgate Latin Version is for the most part very close to 
ame early Greek text. It represents however in some cases readings 
which are not now noted from Greek MSS. : 
li, τ sed et st: καὶ ἐὰν δέ (Did). 
12 remittuntur (! ἀφίονται). 
ill, 17 qui habuerit : om. δέ. 
iv. 3 qui solvit (Ave) Jeswm Christum. 
hic est antichristus, quod. 
4 eum: αὐτόν. 
16 caritati + Dei. 
v. 6 Christus for τὸ πνεῦμα. 
7 unum sunt for εἰς τὸ ἕν εἰσιν. 
9 test. Dei + quod majus est. 
15 et scimus (x*A omit καὶ éav). 
Other readings are preserved in some later copies: 
ll. τὸ in nobis non est. 
27 maneat: μενέτω. 
lil, 6 + et omnis. 
16 + Dei. 
iv. 2 cognoscitur: γινώσκεται. 
v. τό sevt: εἰδῇ. 
ut roget quis: iva ἐρωτήσῃ τις. 
17 om. οὐ. 
It agrees with x alone in ii. 8 (+ e¢ in tpso), and with B 31* in 
li. 25 (vobis). 
Some peculiarities of order may perhaps represent real variations: 
i. g fidelis et iustus est. 


11, 5 verbum eius. 


TEXT. ᾿ XXVil 


iv. 3 nunc tam in mundo est. 
12 vidit umquam. 
17 nobiscum caritas. 

In three places ‘ sicué est’ represents ὡς, καθώς, 1. 7; iil. 3, 7. 

Variations in other passages may be simply due to interpretation: 
1. 4 scripsimus, ii. 18 nunc autem, id. 20 sed vos, iii. 19 suademus, 
iv. 20 videt (2). 

The peculiarities of interpretation in the following places are 
worthy of remark. Many of them are touched upon afterwards: 

1. 3 ut...sit. 

li, 2 pro totius mundi [peccatis]. 

16 cone. carnis est...que non est. 

21 non...quasr ignorantibus...sed quasi scientibus... 
111. 1 εἰ nominenvur et simus. 

10 gui non est tustus. 

14 translati sumus. 
Vv. 4 que vincit. 

15 guas postulamus. 

16 petit. 

18 generatio det (1 ἡ γέννησις τοῦ θεοῦ). 

20 ut cognoscamus...ut simus, 

But caution is necessary in constructing the Greek text which 
the version represents. The same words are not always rendered 
in the same way in like contexts. Thus παράγεται is rendered 
transterunt in 11. 8 and transibit (transit) (though both forms may 
possibly represent ¢ransvit) in ii. 17; τηρεῖν is rendered in three 
consecutive verses by observare, custodire, servare (ii. 3, 4, 5); φῶς 
is rendered by lux (i. 5, 7; ii. 9), and by lumen (ii. 7, 10); γινώσκο- 
μεν in the same connexion is translated scimus (ii. 3, 5, 18; iii. 24), 


cognoscimus (iii. το; iv. 6; v. 2), and intellegimus (iv. 13). 


C2 


ΧΧΥΠῚ 


Titles in 
MSS. 


The title 
Catholic. 


TITLE. 


Il. TITLE. 


In Cod. Vat. B and Cod. Alex. A the title is simply “Iwdvov 
(-dvwov) ἃ, Of John τ. In Cod. Sin. νὰ this is further defined 
Ἶ. ἐπιστολὴ a, The first Kpistle of John; and in Cod. Angelicus L 
(sec. 1x.) it becomes ἐπιστολὴ καθολικὴ τοῦ ἁγίου ἀποστόλου ᾽1., The 
Catholic Epistle of the holy Apostle John ; while Cod. Porphyr. P 
(sec. 1x.) gives "I. τοῦ εὐαγγελιστοῦ Kal ἀποσ[τόλου ἐπιστολὴ] ἃ, The 
fast Epistle of John the Evangelist and Apostle. 

One heading from a later MS. (f) is worth quoting: βροντῆς 
vids “I. τάδε χριστιανοῖσιν, John, a son of thunder, [saith] these things 
to Christians. 

The Epistle is commonly spoken of as ἐπιστολὴ καθολική, ‘a 
catholic, general, epistle.’ The meaning of the epithet is well given 
by Ccumenius (sec. x.). Καθολικαὶ λέγονται αὗται οἱονεὶ ἐγκύκλιοι. 
Οὐ γὰρ ἀφωρισμένως ἔθνει ἑνὶ ἢ πόλει ὡς ὁ θεῖος Παῦλος, οἷον “Pupai- 
οις ἢ Κορινθίοις, προσφωνεῖ ταύτας τὰς ἐπιστολὰς ὁ τῶν τοιούτων τοῦ 
κυρίου μαθητῶν θίασος, ἀλλὰ καθόλου τοῖς πιστοῖς, ἤτοι Ἰουδαίοις τοῖς 
ἐν τῇ διασπορᾷ, ὡς καὶ ὁ Πέτρος, ἢ καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς ὑπὸ τὴν αὐτὴν πίστιν 
Χριστιανοῖς τελοῦσιν (Pref. ad Comm. in Ep. Jac.). 

The word occurs in this connexion from the close of the second 
century onwards. Thus Clement of Alexandria (Strom. Iv. c. 15, 
§ 99, p. 606 P.) speaks of the letter contained in Acts xv. 23 ff. as 
4 ἐπιστολὴ ἡἣ καθολικὴ τῶν ἀποστόλων amdvTwy...duaxopicbeioa εἰς 
τοὺς πιστούς... Origen uses the epithet of the First Epistle of St 
Peter (cf. Euseb, H. 1. vi. 25), 1 John, Jude (in the Latin trans- 
lation), and of the (apocryphal) letter of Barnabas (c. Cels. 1. 63). 
So also the word is used of letters with a general application 
(though specially addressed) which made no claim to canonical 
authority (Euseb. H. 1. 1v. 23; comp. v. 18). 

In this sense the word was appropriately applied to the letters 
of James, 1 Peter, 1 John, which formed the centre of the collection 


of non-Pauline Epistles. It was then extended to 2 Peter and Jude, 


TITLE, XxIx 


which are perfectly general in their address; and so (less accurately) 
to 2, 3 John, which were taken in close connexion with 1 John. 

By a singular error the group of letters was called in the later The title 

Western Church ‘canonical’ (canonice) in place of ‘catholic,’ Τοοδιοαςς 
Junilius (c. Α.Ὁ. 550) had spoken of the letters of James, 2 Peter, 
Jude, 2, 3 John as added by very many to the collection of Canonical 
books (que apostolorum Canonice nuncupantur). Cassiodorus fol- 
lowing shortly afterwards adopted the epithet apparently as a pecu- 
liar title of the whole group (de inst. div. Litt. 8), though he extends 
it also to the whole collection of apostolic epistles. From him it 
passed into common use in this limited sense (comp. Deer. Gelas. 
ὃ 6 οὖ. Ul, Hist. of N. T. Canon, p. 572). 


11. FORM. 


In catalogues of the Books of the New Testament the writing The 
: . 5 ) writing 
is always called a ‘letter,’ but the question arises In what sense can has no 
specific 
marks of 
‘ tained in it of person or place: there is no direct trace of the 8 letter; 


it be so called? It has no address, no subscription; no name is con- 


author, no indication of any special destination. In these respects 
it is distinguished from the Epistle of St James and from the 
Epistles to the Ephesians and to the Hebrews, which come nearest 
to it. The Epistle of St James ends abruptly, but it has a formal 
salutation. The Epistle to the Ephesians has a salutation, though 
it is probable that in different copies the names of different 
churches were inserted, and it has a formal close: the Epistle 
to the Hebrews has a formal close with several personal details. 
The writing of St John is destitute of all that is local or special. 

But while this is so, the writing is at the same time instinct but is full 
from first to last with intense personal feeling. The author is not Sree 
dealing with abstractions but with life and living men. He is ship. 
bound to them and they to him: the crown of his joy and their 
joy is the fulness of their faith (i. 4). He appeals to them as 


ΧΧΧ 


A Pas- 
toral. 


The au- 
thorship 
insepar- 
able from 
that of the 
Gospel. 


FORM. 


one who is acquainted both with their position and with their 
history (ii. 12 ff). 

He speaks in teaching and in counsel with the directness of 
personal experience (i. 1 ff). He has a clear view of the dangers 
and of the strength of those whom he addresses (ii. 12 ff. ; 7, 22, 27: 
iii. 2,13 £; iv. 1, 4 ff; v. 13, 18 ff). But all individual relation- 
ship and sympathy is seen in the light of a fellowship spiritual and 
eternal to which it is contributory. 

Thus perhaps we can best look at the writing not as a Letter 
called out by any particular circumstances, but as a Pastoral 
addressed to those who had been carefully trained and had lived 
long in the Faith; and, more particularly, to those who were 
familiar either with the teaching contained in the Fourth Gospel 
or with the record itself. The substance of the Gospel is a com- 
mentary on the Epistle: the Epistle is (so to speak) the condensed 


moral and practical application of the Gospel. 


Iv. AUTHORSHIP, DATE, PLACE OF WRITING. 


The question of the authorship of the Epistle cannot be dis- 
cussed as an isolated question. The writing is so closely connected 
with the Fourth Gospel in vocabulary, style, thought, scope, that 
these two books cannot but be regarded as works of the same author 
(see ὃ viii)’. The proofs which are given elsewhere to establish 
the fact that the Fourth Gospel was written by the Apostle 
St John extend to the Epistle also. Every paragraph of the 
Epistle reveals to the student its underlying dependence upon the 
record preserved in the Gospel. The teaching which it conveys 
is in every part the outcome of the life which is quickened by the 


Evangelist’s witness to Christ. It is not that the author of the 


1 The arguments which have been the books were not detached from life 
alleged to support the opinion thatthe and criticised without regard to their 
Books were by different authors, do main characteristics. Huther has ex- 
not seem to me to need serious exami- amined them in detail. Einl. § 3. 
nation. They could not be urged if ᾿ 


AUTHORSHIP, DATE; PLACE OF WRITING. ΧΧΧΙ 


Epistle directly uses the materials contained in the Gospel: he 
has found in them his starting-point and his inspiration, but at 
once he goes on to deal independently with problems which are 
before him. 
A single illustration will suffice to shew the general relations The con- 
of the two Books. Let any one compare the Introduction to the ie 


between 


Gospel (John i. 1—18) with the Introduction to the Epistle (1 John ἀπὸ a 


i. 1—4), and it will be seen how the same mind deals with the το Ὁ Ἄς 
same ideas in different connexions. No theory of conscious imita- pendence 
tion can reasonably explain the subtle coincidences and differences 
in these two short crucial passages. And here a close comparison 
can be fairly made, because the Evangelist writes in this case not 
as a narrator of the Lord’s words, but in his own person’. 
It may be added that the writer of the Epistle speaks through- 
out with the authority of an Apostle. He claims naturally and 
simply an immediate knowledge of the fundamental facts of the 
Gospel (i. 1; iv. 14), and that special knowledge which was pos- 
sessed only by the most intimate disciples of the Lord (i. 1 ἐψηλαφή- 
σαμεν). 
But while the two writings are thus closely connected, there is The rela- 


: . : : tive dat 
no sufficient evidence to determine the relative dates of the Epistle of. renner 


Books un- 


and of the Gospel as written. The difference in the treatment of (407 


common topics and in the use of common language leads to no 
certain conclusion. Such variations are sufficiently accounted for 
by the different nature of the two writings; and there is every 
reason to believe that the Fourth Gospel was shaped by the Apostle 
in oral teaching long before it was published or committed to 
writing. It can only be said with confidence that the Epistle pre- 
supposes in those for whom it was composed a familiar acquaintance 
with the characteristic truths which are preserved for us in the 
Gospel. 
The conclusion as to the authorship of the Epistle which is External 


i - id : 
obtained from internal evidence is supported by external evidence ose 


1 Compare also i. 3 f., v. 13 with John xx. 31. See § ix. 


XXxil 


Probably 
written 
late and at 
Ephesus. 


Addressed 
to a circle 
of Asiatic 
Churches. 


AUTHORSHIP, DATE, PLACE OF WRITING. 


as strong as the circumstances allow us to expect. It was used by 
Papias (Euseb. H. 15. 11. 39), by Polycarp (ad Phil. c. 7), and by 
Irenzeus, the disciple of Polycarp (111. 16, 18). It is mentioned in 
the Muratorian fragment ‘as received in the Catholic Church,’ ac- 
cording to the more probable rendering, or as ‘reckoned among 
the Catholic Epistles'.’ It was included in the oldest Versions of 
the East (Syriac) and West (Latin). It was quoted by the earliest 
fathers of Africa and Alexandria, whose writings have been pre- 
served, Tertullian and Clement; and till recent times was ‘univer- 
sally ackriowledged’ (Euseb. H. EZ. 1. 25; Hieron. de virr. ill. 9). 

There is no direct evidence to shew, when and where it was 
written. The circumstances of the Christian Society point clearly 
to a late date, and this may be fixed with reasonable likelihood in 
the last decade of the first century. The later years of St John 
were spent at Ephesus; and, in the absence of any other indication, 
it is natural to suppose that it was written there. 

The specific form of false teaching which is directly condemned 
in the Epistle (iv. 3) suggests the same conclusion. Cerinthus, 
who is known to have maintained it, taught in Asia Minor at the 
end of the first century, and is placed by tradition in immediate 
connexion with St John (comp. § vi). 


V. DESTINATION, 


This being so, it seems to follow that the writing was addressed 
primarily to the circle of Asiatic Churches, of which Ephesus was 
the centre. Universal tradition and such direct evidence as there is 
from Asiatic writings alike confirm this view. Nor is there any 
evidence against it, for the strange statement which gained currency 
through Augustine (Qwest. Evang. τι. 39) that the Epistle was ad- 
dressed ‘to the Parthians’ (epistola ad Parthos) is obviously a 
blunder, and is wholly unsupported by any independent authority’. 

1 Superscripti Johannis duas in ? In one Latin MS., referred to by 


catholica (all. catholicis) habentur. Sabatier, the Epistle is said to bear 
Comp. Hist. of N. T. Canon, p. 537. the title, Epistola ad Sparthos. This 


CHARACTER, XXX1i1 


VI. CHARACTER. 


The exact destination of the Letter is however of no real The Book 


1 it offer answers to 
and 10 offers ἃ ἡ new age 


of the 
Church. 


moment. The colouring is not local but moral ; 
vivid picture of a Christian Society which is without parallel in the 
The storm which St Paul foretold in his Pastoral 


Epistles (2 Tim. iii. 1; iv. 3), and in his address to the Ephesian 


New Testament. 
elders (Acts xx. 29 f.), had broken over the Church. Jerusalem 
had been destroyed. The visible centre of the Theocracy had been 
removed. The Church stood out alone as the Body through which 
the Holy Spirit worked among men. And in correspondence with 
this change the typical form of trial was altered. Outward dangers 
were overcome, The world was indeed perilous; but it was rather 
by its seductions than by its hostility. There is no trace of any 
recent or impending persecution. Now the main teinptations are 
from within. Perhaps a period of tranquillity gave occasion for 
internal dissensions as well as for internal development. 

Two general characteristics of the Epistle are due to this change 
in the position of the Church. On the one side the missionary work 
of the Society no longer occupies a first place in the <Apostle’s 
thoughts; and on the other, the topics of debate are changed. 

At first sight there is something almost unintelligible in the The world 


overcome. 


tone in which St John speaks of ‘the world.’ He regards it with- 


out wonder and without sorrow. For him ‘love’ is identical with 


‘love of the brethren.’ The difficulty however disappears when his 


has led to the conjecture that it was 
originally epistola ad Sparsos (comp. 
1 Pet. i. 1). It is however more pro- 
bable that the title is a corruption of 
πρὸς παρθένους. Ina fragment of the 
Latin translation of the Outlines of 
Clement of Alexandria, it is said: 
secunda Johannis epistola que ad 
virgines scripta simplicissima est (p. 
τοῖο P.); and a late cursive MS. (62) 
has for the subscription of the second 
Epistle, "I. 8 πρὸς Πάρθους. This title 
may easily have been extended to the 


first Epistle, and then misinterpreted. 
So Cassiodorus extends the title ad 
Parthos to the Epistles of St John 
generally: Epistole Petri ad gentes 
.. Johannis ad Parthos (de instit. div. 
litt. x1v.). Bede’s statement that 
‘Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria,’ 
was ‘among the many ecclesiastical 
writers who affirm that it was written 
to the Parthians’ (Prol. super vit. 
Canon. Epp.), cannot be accepted with- 
out corroborative evidence. 


XXX1V 


The Jew- 
ish con- 
troversy 
closed. 


The main 
question 
that of the 
Person of 
Christ. 


Docetism. 


CHARACTER. 


point of sight is realised. According to his view, which answers 
to the eternal order of things, the world exists indeed, but more as 
a semblance than as a reality. It is overcome finally and for ever. 
It is on the point of vanishing. This outward consummation is in 
God’s hands. And over against ‘the world’ there is the Church, 
the organised Christian society, the depository of the Truth and 
the witness for the Truth. By this therefore all that need be done 
to proclaim the Gospel to those without is done naturally and 
effectively in virtue of its very existence. It must overcome the 
darkness by shining. There is therefore no need for eager exhorta- 
tion to spread the word. St Paul wrote while the conflict was 
undecided. St John has seen its close. 

This paramount office of the Church to witness to and to embody 
the Truth, concentrated attention upon the central idea of its mes- 
sage in itself and not in its relation to other systems. The first 
controversies which fill the history of the Acts and St Paul’s 
Epistles are over. There is no trace of any conflict between ad- 
vocates of the Law and of the Gospel, between champions of works 
and faith. The difference of Jew and Gentile, and the question of 
circumcision, have no place in the composition. The names them- 
selves do not occur (yet see 3 John 7). There is nothing even to 
shew to which body the readers originally belonged, for v. 21 cannot 
be confined to a literal interpretation. The main questions of 
debate are gathered round the Person and Work of the Lord. On 
the one side He was represented as a mere man (Ebionism): on 
the other side He was represented as a mere phantom (Docetism) : 
a third party endeavoured to combine these two opinions, and sup- 
posed that the divine element, Christ, was united with the man 
Jesus at His Baptism and left Him before the Passion (Cerinth- 
ianism). 

The Epistle gives no evidence that St John had to contend with 
Ebionistic error. The false teaching with which he deals is Docetic 
and specifically Cerinthian. In respect of the Docetic heresy gene- 
rally Jerome’s words are striking : apostolis adhuc in sexculo super- 


stitibus, adhuc apud Judeam Christi sanguine recenti, phantasma 


CHARACTER. 


Domini corpus asserebatur (Dial. adv. Lucifer. § 23). Ignatius 
writes against it in urgent language: 

Ad Trall. 9, το, Κωφώθητε οὖν ὅταν ὑμῖν χωρὶς Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ 
λαλῇ τις, τοῦ ἐκ γένους Δαυΐδ, τοῦ ἐκ Μαρίας, ὃς ἀληθῶς ἐγεννήθη, 
ἔφαγέν τε καὶ ἔπιεν, ἀληθῶς ἐδιώχθη ἐπὶ Ποντίου Πιλάτου, ἀληθῶς 
ἐσταυρώθη καὶ ἀπέθανεν.. ὃς καὶ ἀληθῶς ἠγέρθη ἀπὸ νεκρῶν...Ἐὶ δέ, 
ὥσπερ τινὲς ἄθεοι ὄντες... λέγουσιν τὸ δοκεῖν πεπονθέναι αὐτὸν αὐτοὶ 
τὸ δοκεῖν ὄντες, ἐγὼ τί δέδεμαι ; 

Ad Smyrn. 2, ἀληθῶς ἔπαθεν ὡς καὶ αληθῶς ἀνέστησεν ἑαυτόν' 
οὐχ ὥσπερ ἀπιστοί τινες λέγουσιν τὸ δοκεῖν αὐτὸν πεπονθέναι, αὐτοὶ 
τὸ δοκεῖν ὄντες. Comp. cc. 1, 5, 12. 

Ad Ephes. 7, εἷς ἰατρός ἐστιν, σαρκικός τε καὶ πνευματικός, γεννη- 
τὸς καὶ ἀγέννητος, ἐν σαρκὶ γενόμενος θεός, ἐν θανάτῳ ζωὴ ἀληθινή, καὶ 
ἐκ Μαρίας καὶ ἐκ θεοῦ πρῶτον παθητὸς καὶ τότε ἀπαθής. Comp. c. 18. 

So also Polycarp : 

Ad Phil. c. 7, πᾶς yap ὃς ἂν μὴ ὁμολογῇ ᾿Ιησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐν σαρκὶ 
ἐληλυθέναι ἀντίχριστός ἐστι: καὶ ὃς ἂν μὴ ὁμολογῇ τὸ μαρτύριον τοῦ 
σταυροῦ ἐκ τοῦ διαβόλου ἐστί". 

Ireneus characterises in particular the opinions of Cerinthus 
very clearly: (Cerinthus] Jesum subjicit non ex Virgine natum, 
impossibile enim hoc ei visum est; fuisse autem eum Joseph et 
Marie filium...et plus potuisse justitia et prudentia et sapientia pre 
omnibus, et post baptismum descendisse in eum Christum ab ea 
principalitate que est super omnia...in fine autem revolasse iterum 
Christum de Jesu, et Jesum passum esse et resurrexisse : Christum 


autem impassibilem perseverasse existentem spiritalem’. 


XXXKV 


Cerin- 
thianism. 


In the presence of these false views St John unfolds the Truth, Against 


St John or Cerinthus should have 


1 The so-called ‘Gospel according 
to Peter’ is said to have favoured their 
views (Serapion, ap. Euseb, H. E. 
VI. 12). 

2 Tren. adv. her. τ. 26. τ. Comp. 
Epiph. Her. xxvut.1. For the story 
of St John’s refusal to be under the 
same roof. with Cerinthus, see Iren. 
ap. Euseb. H. E. rv. 14 (Iren. adv. 
her. m1. 3. 4, on the authority of 
Polycarp). It is strange that either 


visited the baths at Ephesus. This 
difficulty however was not felt by 
Ivenejus. The Christology of Nes- 
torianism pressed to its logical con- 
sequences is not distinguishable, as it 
appears, from that of Cerinthus. The 
more extreme Docete regarded the 
manifestation of the Lord as being in 
appearance only (φαντασίᾳ), like the 
Theophanies in the Old Testament. 


this false 


XXXV1 


teaching 
St John 
proclaims 
again the 
Gospel 


as the old 
Truth. 


The letter 
specially 
applicable 
at present 
from its 
eircum- 
stances, 
and 


from its 
teaching. 


CHARACTER, 


not in the form of argument but of announcement. He declares 
that Jesus Christ has come (iv. 2), and is coming (2 Ep. 7) in the 
flesh (comp. v. 6). He shews that the denial of the Incarnate Son 
is practically the denial of the Father, the denial of God (ii. 22; 
v. 20). It is the rejection of that power by which alone true life 
is possible through a divine fellowship (i. 2 f.). 

But in insisting on these truths St John disclaims all appear- 
ance of bringing forward new points. His readers know implicitly 
all that he can tell them. He simply pleads that they should yield 
themselves to the guidance of the Spirit which they had received. 
So they would realise what in fact they already possessed (ii. 7, 24; 
iii, 11). Perhaps it may be inferred from the stress which St John 
lays on the identity of the original word with the teaching which 
he represented, that some had ventured to charge him also with 
innovation. Such an accusation would have superficial plausibility ; 
and the Epistle deals with it conclusively either by anticipation or 
in view of actual opponents. 

Thus this latest of the Epistles is a voice from the midst of the 
Christian Church revealed at last in its independence. Many who 
read it had, in all probability, grown up as Christians. A Christianity 
of habit was now possible. The spiritual circumstances of those to 
whom it was first sent are like our own. The words need no accom- 
modation to make them bear directly upon ourselves. 

And while the Christological errors which St John meets exist 
more or less at all times, they seem to have gained a dangerous 
prevalence now. Modern realism, which has found an ally in art, 
by striving to give distinctness to the actual outward features of 
the Lord’s Life, seems to tend more and more to an Ebionitic Christ- 
ology. Modern idealism, on the other hand, which aims at securing 
the pure spiritual conception free from all associations of time and 
place, is a new Docetism. Nor would it be hard to shew that 
popular Christology is largely though unconsciously affected by 
Cerinthian tendencies. The separation of Jesus, the Son of Man, 
from Christ, the Son of God, is constantly made to the destruction 


of the One, indivisible Person of our Lord and Saviour. We have 


CHARACTER. XXXVII 


indeed no power to follow such revelations of Scripture into sup- 
posed consequences, but our strength is to hold with absolute firm- 
ness the apostolic words as St John has delivered them to us. 


The teaching of St John in his Epistle thus turns upon the The facts 
the 
spel the 


it is intensely practical. St John everywhere presents moral ideas basis and 
motive for 


resting upon facts and realised in life. The foundation on which action. 


Person of Christ. Under this aspect it is important to observe that a 


conviction is based is historical experience (i. 1 ff.; iv. 14). This, 
as furnishing the materials for that knowledge which St John’s 
readers had ‘heard from the beginning,’ is set over against mere 
speculation (ii. 24). Truth is never stated in a speculative form, but 
as a motive and a help for action. The writer does not set before 
his readers propositions about Christ, but the Living Christ Him- 
self for present fellowship. And yet while this is so, the Epistle 
contains scarcely anything in detail of Christ’s Life. He came in 
the flesh, ‘by water and blood’; the Life was manifested; He 
walked as we are bound to walk. He laid down His Life for us; 
He is to be manifested yet again; this is all. There is no mention 
of the Cross or of the Resurrection. But Christ having died lives 
as our Advocate. (Compare Addit. Note on v. 6.) 
The apprehension of the historical manifestation of the Life of Intellec- 


ΕΗ : 5 tual assent 
Christ is thus pressed as the prevailing and sufficient motive for jn itself 


godlike conduct; and at the same time mere right opinion, apart rey 
from conduct, is exposed in its nothingness. Simply to say, ‘we 

have fellowship with God,’ ‘we are in the light,’ we ‘know God,’ 

is shewn to be delusion if the corresponding action is wanting 

(i. 6, 11. 9, 4). 

The Epistle, as has been already said, comes from the midst of iad is 
the Christian Church to the members of the Church. It is the the Epi- 
voice of an unquestioned teacher to disciples who are assumed to be ples 
anxious to fulfil their calling. In virtue of the circumstances of 
its composition it takes the widest range in the survey of the Gospel, 
and completes and harmonises the earlier forms of apostolic teaching. 
St John’s doctrine of ‘love’ reconciles the complementary doctrines 


of ‘faith’ and ‘works.’ His view of the primal revelation ‘that 


XXXVI CHARACTER. 


which was from the beginning...concerning the word of life,’ places 
Judaism in its true position as part of the discipline of the world, 
and vindicates for Christianity its claim to universality. His doc- 
trine of ‘Jesus Christ come in flesh’ affirms at once the historical 
and the transcendental aspects of His Person. His exhibition of 
a present divine fellowship for man, issuing in a future transfigura- 
tion of man to the divine likeness, offers a view of life able to meet 
human weakness and human aspiration. 


Silence as Two other peculiarities of the Epistle seem to be due to the 
to Old 
Testamen 


and seco of all the writings of the New Testament except the two shorter 
ea: letters and the Epistle to Philemon, it contains no quotations or 
100. 


, same causes which determined this catholicity of teaching. Alone 


clear reminiscences of the language of the Old Testament (yet see 
iii. 12). And again, while the Christian Society is everywhere 
contemplated in its definite spiritual completeness, nothing is said 


on any detail of ritual or organisation. 


VII. OBJECT. 


The object § The object of the Epistle corresponds with its character. It is 


f th 2 
Epistle (as Presented under a twofold form : 


of the ΒΝ aes . > ΄ > , Sen 
Gospel) (i) i. 3, £ ὃ ἑωράκαμεν καὶ ἀκηκόαμεν ἀπαγγέλλομεν καὶ ὑμῖν, ἵνα 


Ῥοβῖθίνθ. καὶ ὑμεῖς κοινωνίαν ἔχητε μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν, καὶ 4 κοινωνία δὲ ἡ ἡμετέρα μετὰ 
τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ μετὰ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ: καὶ ταῦτα γράφομεν 
ἡμεῖς ἵνα ἡ χαρὰ ἡμῶν (v. ὑμῶν) ἢ πεπληρωμένη. 

That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you also, 
that ye also may have fellowship with us: yea, and our fellowship 
is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: and these 
things we write, that our joy may be fulfilled. 

(ii) v. 13 ταῦτα ἔγραψα ὑμῖν ἵνα εἴδητε ὅτι ζωὴν ἔχετε αἰώνιον, τοῖς 
πιστεύουσιν εἰς τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ. 

These things have I written unto you, that ye may know that ye 
have eternal life, even unto you that believe on the name of the Son 


of God. 


OBJECT. ΠΣ 


With these must be compared the account given of the object of 
the Gospel : 

(ili) John xx. 31 ταῦτα δὲ γέγραπται ἵνα πιστεύσητε ὅτι Ἰησοῦς 
ἐστὶν ὁ Χριστὸς ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ ἵνα πιστεύοντες ζωὴν ἔχητε ἐν τῷ 
ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ. 

But these are written, that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, 
the Son of God ; and that believing ye may have life in his name. 


There is a complete harmony between the three. The acceptance 
of the revelation of Jesus—the Son of man—as the Christ, the Son 
of God (iii), brings the power of life (ii), and this life is fellowship 
with man and with God in Christ (i). Life, in other words, life 
eternal, is in Christ Jesus, and is realised in all its extent in union 
with Him: it is death to be apart from Him. 

The pursuit of such a theme necessarily involves the condem- 
nation and refutation of corresponding errors. But St John’s 
method is to confute the error by the exposition of the truth realised 
in life. His object is polemical only so far as the clear unfolding 
of the essence of right teaching necessarily shews all error in its 
real character. In other words St John writes to call out a welcome 
for what he knows to be the Gospel and not to overthrow this or 


that false opinion. 


VIII. STYLE AND LANGUAGE. 


The style of the Epistle bears a close resemblance to that cf the General 
. ὦ resem- 
Gospel both in vocabulary and structure. There is in both the same blance to 
» the Gos- 


emphatic repetition of fundamental words and phrases,—‘ truth, pel 
‘love,’ ‘light,’ ‘in the light,’ ‘ being born of God,’ ‘being’ or ‘ abiding 
in God’—and the same monotonous simplicity of construction. 

The particles are singularly few. For example γάρ occurs only aa 
three times: ii. 19; iv. 20; v. 3 (2 John 11; 3 John 3, 7); 8€cles. 
nine times (about one-third of its average frequency); μέν τε and οὖν 


(3 John 8) do not occur at all (the last is twice wrongly in common 


xl 


St John 
develops 
an idea by 
parallel- 
ism. 


Charac- 
teristic 
words. 


STYLE AND LANGUAGE. 


text). The absence of οὖν is the more remarkable because it is 
the characteristic particle of the narrative of the Gospel, where 
St John seems to dwell on the connexion of facts which might be 
overlooked; ὅτι, ‘that’ and ‘because,’ is very frequent ; and it is 
constantly found where yap might have been expected. 

The common particle of connexion is καί This conjunction 
takes its peculiar colour from the sentences which are thus added 
one to the other: eg. i. 5; ii. 3; and it is used not uncommonly 
when a particle of logical sequence might have been expected : 6.9. 
iii. 3, 16. 

Very frequently the sentences and clauses follow one another 
without any particles: eg. il. 22—24; iv. 4—6; 7—10; I11—13. 
See also ii. 5,6; 9, 10; ill. 2; 4,53 9, Io. 

Sometimes they are brought into an impressive parallelism by 


the repetition of a clause : 
i. 6, 8, 10 (ἐὰν εἴπωμεν). 
vy. 18—20 (οἴδαμεν). 


These different usages are different adaptations of St John’s 
characteristic principle of composition: he explains and develops 
his ideas by parallelism or (which answers to the same tone of 
thought) by antagonism. 

Tt is not of course maintained that this method of writing is the 
result of studied choice. It is, as far as we may presume to judge, 
the spontaneous expression of the Apostle’s vision of the Truth, 
opening out in its fulness before the eye of the believer, complete in 
its own majesty, requiring to be described and not to be drawn out 
by processes of reasoning. 

In this respect and generally it will be felt that the writing is 
thoroughly Hebraistic in tone, and yet it does not contain one quo- 
tation or verbal reminiscence from the Old Testament. 

Of significant verbal coincidences of language between the 
Epistles and Gospel the following may be noticed. The words are 
either exceptionally frequent in these writings or peculiar to them: 


κόσμος (moral) (John i. 10 note). 


STYLE AND LANGUAGE, ΧΙ 


φώς (τ John i. 5 note). 

σκοτία (σκότος) (i. 6 note). 

φανεροῦν (i. 2 note). 

φαίνειν (ii. 8 note). 

ἑωρακέναι (i. 1 note). 

θεᾶσθαι (θεωρεῖν only once in the Epistles: 1 John iii, 17 (John 
i. 14 note). 

θάνατος (spiritual) (iii, 14 note). 

ζωὴ αἰώνιος (ἢ αἰώνιος €., 4 & ἡ al.) (Add. note on v. 20). 

ἡ ἀλήθεια (i. 6 note). 

ὁ ἀληθινὸς θεός (ν. 20 note). 

τὸ πνεῦμα τῆς ἀληθείας (iv. 6 note). 

μαρτυρεῖν, μαρτυρία (i. 2 note). 

τεκνία (ii. τ note). 

παιδία (ii. 14 note). 

0 μονογενὴς vids (Add. note on iv. 9). 

ἀγαπᾷν ἀλλήλους, τὸν ἀδελφόν, τοὺς ad. (ili. rr note). 

νικᾷν (il. 13 note). 

μένειν, εἶναι, ἔν τινι (il. 5 note). 

τὴν ψυχὴν τιθέναι (iii. 16 note). 

The frequent use of ἵνα when the idea of purpose is not directly 
obvious, and the elliptical use of ἀλλ᾽ iva, are both characteristic of 
these books (111. 11; ii. 19 notes). 

In addition to these verbal coincidences there are also larger Verbal co- 


oats 5 ᾿ incidences 
coincidences of expression. Of these the most important are the vith the 
following : Gospel. 
1 EpistLe or St Joun. GosPeL or St JOHN. 
i. 2, 3 9 ζωὴ ἐφανερώθη καὶ iii, τἰ ὃ ἑωράκαμεν μαρτυ- 


ἑωράκαμεν καὶ μαρτυροῦμεν...ὃ ροῦμεν. 
ἑωράκαμεν καὶ ἀκηκόαμεν ἀπαγ- 
γέλλομεν καὶ ὑμῖν. 

id. 4 ταῦτα γράφομεν ἡμεῖς xvi. 24 αἰτεῖτε καὶ λήμψεσθε 
ἵνα ἡ χαρὰ ὑμῶν ἢ πεπλη- ἵνα ἡ χαρὰ ὑμῶν ἡ πεπληρω- 
ρωμένη. μένη. 

W. J. d 


STYLE AND 


1 EpistLe or St Joun. 

ii, 11 ὃ μισῶν Tov ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ 
οὐέν τῇ σκοτίᾳ περιπατεῖ καὶ 
οὐκ oldev ποῦ ὑὕπαγει. 

id. τ4 ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν ὑμῖν 
μένει. 

id. 17 ὁ ποιῶν τὸ θέλημα τοῦ 
θεοῦ μένει εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα. 


aes « ἊΣ 2 A > μ᾿ 
iil. 5 ἁμαρτία ἐν αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔστιν. 


id. 8 ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς ὁ διάβολος ἁμαρ- 
τάνει. 
id. 13 μὴ θαυμάζετε, ἀδελφοί, 


Μ, a 8 
εἰ μισεῖ ὑμᾶς ὁ κόσμος. 


id. τ4 οἴδαμεν ὅτι μεταβεβή- 
2 a , > y 
καμεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτου eis THY 
ζωὴν ὅτι ἀγαπώμεν τοὺς ἀδελφούς. 
id. τό ἐκεῖνος ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν 


τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ ἔθηκεν. 


= Ν ἃ fol ' 

id. 22 ὃ av αἰτῶμεν AapPavopev 

μὲ Ἂς hd Ν > , > 
..OTL..7TA ἀρεστὰ ἐνώπιον av- 


τοῦ ποιοῦμεν. 


id. 23 αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἐντολὴ αὐτοῦ 
ἵνα... ἀγαπῶμεν ἀλλήλους κα- 
θὼς ἔδωκεν ἐντολὴν ἡμῖν. Comp. 
lv. εἰ. 

iv. 6 ἡμεῖς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐσμέν' 
ὁ γινώσκων τὸν θεὸν ἀκούει ἡμῶν, 
(a) 
() 


a Ἧς ” ΠῚ a an 
ὃς οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ 


> > , fon 
OUK GKOVEL μων. 


LANGUAGE. 


GospeL oF Sr JOHN. 
xii. 35... 
a Β ᾿ 
ὁ περιπατῶν ἐν τῇ σκοτίᾳ οὐκ 
οἷδεν ποῦ ὑπάγει. 
ee ἜΝ ae 

v. 38 τὸν λόγον αὐτοῦ ouk ἔχετε 
μένοντα ἐν ὑμῖν. 

wet ἘΣ ΩΝ 

vill. 35 ὁ υἱὸς 

΄ > Ἂς an 
μένει εἰς TOV αἰῶνα. 

viii. 46 τίς ἐξ ὑμῶν ἐλέγχει pe 
περὶ ἁμαρτίας ; 

vill, 44 ἐκεῖνος [ὁ διάβολος] 
᾽ ee ee 
ἀνθρωποκτόνος ἦν ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς. 

xv. 18 


> © 


εἰ ὁ κόσμος ὑμᾶς μισεῖ γινώ. 
Ρ τ So i 
OKETE OTL ἐμὲ πρῶτον ὑμῶν μεμί: 
σήκεν. 
ε ty £ ? AA 

ν. 24 6 τὸν λόγον pov ἀκούων... 
μεταβέβηκεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτοι 
os , 
εἰς τὴν ζωήν. 

ΧΟ ς 

x ΄ ’ὔ 
τὴν ψυχήν μου τίθημι ὑπὲρ 
fed t 
τῶν προβατων. 

τως ΓΡ 

vill. 29 οὐκ ἀφῆκέν με μόνον 
μὴ 4 ‘ Ἅ. 2 ν > “- ΠῚ 
ὅτι ἐγὼ τὰ ἀρεστὰ αὐτῷ ποιῶ 

i 
πάντοτε. 


ΧΙ, 34 ἐντολὴν καινὴν δίδωμι 
ὑμῖν 
ἵνα ἀγαπᾶτε ἀλλήλους καθὼς 


ἠγάπησα ὑμᾶς ἵνα... 


vill, 47 ὁ ὧν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ τὰ 
τὰς ΠΡ ee 
ῥήματα τοῦ θεοῦ ἀκούει" 
ὑμεῖς οὐκ ἀκούετε () 
(2) 


a ᾿ lel fos > 2 , 
OTL EK TOU θεοῦ OUK ἐστε 


STYLE AND 


1 Episrte or Sr Jonn. 

iv. 15 ὃς ἐὰν ὁμολογήσῃ ὅτι 
Ἰησοῦς [Χριστός] ἐστιν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ 
θεοῦ, 

ε Ν > aA td Ν 2 AN , 
ο θεὸς εν auTw μένει και αυτος €V 
τῷ Oeg. Comp. v. 163 iil. 24. 

id. τό ἐγνώκαμεν καὶ πεπισ- 


, 
τευκαμεν. 


id. τό 
ἘΠ 2 ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ ἐν τῷ θεῶ 
ὁ μένων ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ ἐν τῷ θεῷ 
μένει. 
a 2 Ἂν c , 
v. 4, £. αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ νίκη 
. 
ἡ νικήσασα τὸν κόσμον, ἡ πίστις 
ἡμῶν. 
Ὡς δὲ ‘ ee: 
τίς ἐστιν ὁ νικῶν TOV κόσμον... 
: : Son ee 
id. 9 ἡ μαρτυρία τοῦ θεοῦ μείζων 
a ΄ “ “ 2 ε , 
ἐστίν, ὅτι αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ μαρτυρία 
a fol ¢ 
τοῦ θεοῦ, ὅτι μεμαρτύρηκεν περὶ 
ΟΞ 
τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ. 
: ΠΕ 
id, 20 δέδωκεν ἡμῖν διάνοιαν 
σ , τ ΤΩ , 
ἵνα γιγνώσκομεν τὸν ἀληθινόν" 
Lae 2 ea ix θ ved 2 a en 
καί ἐσμεν ἐν τῷ ἀληθινῷ, ἐν τῷ υἱῷ 
“ “ ~ La 
αὐτοῦ [Ino οὔ Χριστῷ]. οὗτός ἐσ- 
᾿ ‘ ἊΣ , 
tw ὃ ἀληθινὸς θεὸς, καὶ ζωὴ αἰώ- 


γνιος. 


LANGUAGE. xlili 


GosPEL oF St Joun. 
Vi. 56 6 τρώγων μου τὴν σάρκα 


ν , Nf 
και πινων μου TO ata 


δι 2 πὰ 4 > 4 2 ra 
ἐν ἐμοὶ μένει κἀγὼ ἐν αὐτῷ. Comp. 
xiv. 17. 
- ba x 
vl. 69 πεπιστεύκαμεν καὶ 
ἐγνώκαμεν. 
os ‘ 2 id ¢ 
XV. 10 ἐὰν τὰς ἐντολᾶς μου τηρή- 
σητε 
ΕΝ ΡΥ 
μενεῖτε ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ μου. Comp. 
νυ. 9 μείνατε ἐν TH a. τῇ ἐμῇ. 
Xvi. 33 θαρσεῖτε 


x ‘ γ᾿ 
ἐγὼ νενίκηκα τὸν κόσμον. 


ν. 32 ἄλλος ἐστὶν ὁ μαρτυρῶν 
a ςς 9 
περὶ ἐμοῦ καὶ οἶδα ὅτι ἀληθής ἐστιν 
A a a 
ἢ μαρτυρία ἣν μαρτυρεῖ περὶ ἐμοῦ. 
ὃς 4 
Xvi. 3 αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ αἰώνιος 
. 
ζωὴ 
7. ΄ Ν ‘ Ld 
iva γινώσκωσι σὲ τὸν μόνον 
A 
ἀληθινὸν θεὸν καὶ ὃν ἀπέστειλας 


Ἰησοῦν Χριστόν. 


IX. THE EPISTLES AND THE GOSPEL. 


General 
τ ἘΜῸΝ : relation 
have been quoted, illustrate vividly the relation between the of the 
: Epistl 
Both passages contain the same funda- oie 


mental ideas: Eternal life is the progressive recognition (iva γινώ- Gospel. 


The last two passages (1 John v. 20; John xvii. 3), which 
Epistles and the Gospel. 


σκωσὺ) of God; and the power of this growing knowledge is given 
in His Son Jesus Christ. But the ideas are presented differently 


42 


xliv 


The two 
comple- 
mentary. 


The differ- 
ences an- 
swer to 
differences 
between a 
History 
and a 
Pastoral. 


The 
Coming 
(παρουσία). 


THE EPISTLES AND THE GOSPEL. 


in the two places. The Gospel gives the historic revelation ; the 
Epistle shews the revelation as it has been apprehended in the lite 
of the Society and of the believer. 

This fundamental difference can be presented in another form. 
In the Epistle the aim of St John is to lay open what is the 
significance of the spiritual truths of the Faith for present human 
life. In the Gospel his aim is to make clear that the true human 
life of the Lord is a manifestation of divine love, that ‘Jesus is the 
Christ, the Son of God.’ Or, to put the contrast in an epigraim- 
matic form, the theme of the Epistle is, ‘the Christ is Jesus’; the 
theme of the Gospel is, ‘Jesus is the Christ.’ In the former the 
writer starts from certain acknowledged spiritual conceptions and 
points out that they have their foundation in history and their 
necessary embodiment in conduct. In the latter he shews how the 
works and words of Jesus of Nazareth establish that in Him the 
hope of Israel and the hope of humanity was fulfilled. So it is 
that the Gospel is a continuous record of the unfolding of the 
‘glory’ of Christ. In the Epistles alone of all the books of the 
New Testament (except the Epistle to Philemon), the word ‘glory’ 
does not occur. Perhaps too it is significant that the word ‘heaven’ 
also is absent from them. 

Several differences in detail in the topics or form of teaching 
in the books have been already noticed. These belong to the 
differences in the positions occupied by a historian and a preacher. 
The teaching of the Lord which St John has preserved was given, as 
He Himself said, ‘in proverbs’; through the experience of Christian 
life, the Spirit, ‘sent in His Name,’ enabled the Apostle to speak 
‘plainly’ (John xvi. 25). 

Some other differences still require to be noticed. These also 
spring from the historical circumstances of the writing. The first 
regards the doctrine of ‘the Coming,’ ‘the Presence’ (ἡ παρουσία) 
of Christ. In the Gospel St John does not record the eschato- 
logical discourses of the Lord—they had found their first fulfilment 
when he wrote—and he preserves simply the general promise of a 


‘Coming’ (xiv. 3; xxi. 22). By the side of these he records the 


THE EPISTLES AND THE GOSPEL. xlv 


references to the ‘judgment’ (v. 28 f.), and to ‘the last day’ (vi. 
4°, 44). In the Epistle he uses the term ‘the Presence’ (ii. 28), 
which is found in all the groups of New Testament writings, and 
speaks of a future ‘manifestation’ of the Ascended Christ (Jc. : 
iii. 2). As He ‘came in flesh’ (iv. 2), so He is still ‘coming in 
flesh’ (2 John 7). And the importance of this fact is pressed in 
its spiritual bearing. By denying it ‘Antichrists’ displayed their 
real nature. They sought to substitute a doctrine for a living 
Saviour. 

St John’s treatment of the present work of Christ stands in The Ad- 
close connexion with this view of His future work. As the Holy Christ. = 
Spirit is sent to believers as their Advocate on earth, so He is 
their Advocate with the Father in heaven (c. ii. 2). The two 
thoughts are complementary ; and the heavenly advocacy of Christ 
rests upon His own promise in the Gospel (John xiv. 13 f£.), though 
it must not be interpreted as excluding the Father’s spontaneous 
love (John xvi. 26 f.). 

The exposition of the doctrine of ‘propitiation’ and ‘cleansing’ The doc- 

: ε ᾿ 3 ce a - A trine of 
which is found in the Epistle (c. ii. 2; iv. το ἱλασμός ; 1. 7, 9 καθα- Propitia- 
pile) is an application of the discourse αὖ Capernaum (see especially Hon: 
John vi. 51, 56 ἢ)" and it is specially remarkable that while the 
thoughts of the discourse are used, nothing is taken from the lan- 
guage. So again the peculiar description of the spiritual endowment 
of believers as an ‘unction’ (χρίσμα, ο. ii. 20) perfectly embodies 
the words in John xx. 21 ff.; the disciples are in a true sense 
‘Christs’ in virtue of the Life of ‘the Christ’ (John xiv. 19 ; comp. 

Apoc, 1. 6). Once more, the cardinal phrase ‘born of God’ (c. ii. 
29, &c.), which occurs in the introduction to the Gospel (i. 13), but 
not in the record of the Lord’s words, shews in another example 
how the original language of the Lord was shaped under the guidance 
of the Spirit to fullest use. 
It seems scarcely necessary to remark that such differences be- These 


ca NS os differences 
tween the Epistles and the Gospel are not only not indicative of any shew the 


working of 


difference of authorship, but on the contrary furnish a strong proof τον 


that they are the products of one mind. The Epistles give later 


xlvi THE EPISTLES AND THE GOSPEL. 


growths of common and characteristic ideas. No imitator of the 
Gospel could have combined elements of likeness and unlikeness in 
such a manner; and on the other hand, the substance of the Gospel 
adequately explains the more defined teaching of the first Epistle. 


The one writing stands to the other in an intelligible connexion of 


life. 
X. PLAN. 

No plan It is extremely difficult to determine with certainty the structure 

ae of the Epistle. No single arrangement is able to take account of 
the complex development of thought which it offers, and of the 
many connexions which exist between its different parts. The 
following arrangement, which is followed out into detail in the 
notes, seems to me to give on the whole the truest and clearest view 
of the sequence of the exposition. 

Outline Ixtropuction, 

followed. 


The facts of the Gospel issuiny in fellowship and joy (i. τ--- 4). 
A. THE PROBLEM OF LIFE AND THOSE TO WIIOM IT IS PRO- 
POSED (i. 5—ii. 17). 
J. The Nature of God and the consequent relation of 
man to God (i. 5—10). 


II. The remedy for Sin and the sign that it is effectual 


(ii. 1—6). 
III. Obedience in love and light in actual life (ii. 
7—11). 


IV. Things temporal and eternal (ii. 12—17). 
B. THE cONFLICY OF TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD WITHOUT AND 
WITHIN (ii. 18—iv. 6). 
I. The revelation of Falsehood and Truth (ii. r8—29). 
II. The children of God and the children of the Devil 
(iii. 1—12). 
III. Brotherhood in Christ and the hatred of the world 
(11. 13—24). 
IV. The rival spirits of Truth and Error (iv. 1—6). 


PLAN. xl vii 


C. THE CHRISTIAN LIFE: THE VICTORY OF FAITH (iv. 7—V. 21). 


I. The spirit of the Christian life: God and Love (iv. 
7—21). 

If. The power of the Christian life: the Victory and 
Witness of Faith (v. 1—12). 

III. The activity and confidence of the Christian life: 
Epilogue (v. 13—21). 

The thought of a fellowship between God and man, made possible ‘The main 
and in part realised in the Christian Church, runs through the whole ἐπουδθς 
Epistle. From this it begins: Our fellowship is with the Father, 
and with His Son, Jesus Christ (i. 3). In this it closes: We are in 
Him that is True, in His Son Jesus Christ (v. 20). 

In the additional Notes I have endeavoured to illustrate the Systema- 
main points in the development of this thought. These notes when τ eg 
taken in proper order will serve as an introduction to the study of een 
the doctrine of St John. For this purpose they are most con- 
veniently grouped in the following manner: 

I. THE ΡΟΟΤΕΙΝΕ oF Gop. 

The idea of God: note on iv. 8; comp. iv. 12. 
The Divine Name: 3 John 7. 
The Holy Trinity: v. 20. 
The Divine Fatherhood: i. 2. 
II. THE pocrrine or Finrre BEING. 

Creation: note on li. 17. 
God and man: i. 9. 
The nature of man: ili. 19. 
The Devil: ii. 13. 
Sin: i. 9; comp. v. 16. 
The world (note on Gospel of St John i. ro). 
Antichrist: 11. 18. 

III. THE pocrrine or REDEMPTION AND CoNSUMMATION. 
The Incarnation: note on iii. 5. 
The titles of Christ: iii. 23; comp. iv. 9; Vv. I. 
Propitiation: 11. 2. 


xlvili 


PLAN. 


The virtue of Christ’s Blood: 1. 7. 
Divine Sonship: 111. 1. 

The titles of believers: iii. 14. 
Divine Fellowship: iv. 15. 
Eternal Life: v. 20. 


For St John’s view of the Bases of Belief I may be allowed to 
refer to what I have said in regard to his teaching on ‘the Truth,’ 
‘the Light,’ ‘the Witness’ in the Introduction to the Gospel, pp. 
xliv. ff 


INTRODUCTION 


TO 


THE SECOND AND THIRD EPISTLES. 


1. TEXT, 


ΤῊΕ authorities for the text of the Epistles are enumerated in Authori- 
the Introduction to the first Epistle, § 1 (including the MSS. vet 
SAB(C)KLP). The text of Cod. Ephr. (C) is preserved for the 
third Epistle from v. 3—end. 


The variations from the text of Stephens (1550) which I have Variations 


P δ from 
adopted are set down in the following table : Stephens, 
1550- 
Tue Srconp EPISTLE. a Jon. 


om. Κυρίου, ‘Jesus Christ’ (AB), for ‘the Lord Jesus Christ.’ 
γράφων for γράφω (apparently an error). 


3 
5 
6 αὕτη ἡ ἐντολή ἐστιν (AB), for αὕτη ἐστὶν 7 ἐντολή. 
7 ἐξῆλθαν, are gone forth (NAB), for εἰσῆλθον, are entered. 
8 ἀπολέσητε, ye lose (X°AB), for ἀπολέσωμεν, we lose. 
ἀπολάβητε, ye receive (NAB), for ἀπολάβωμεν, we receive. 
9 προάγων, goeth onward (NAB), for παραβαίνων, transgresseth. 
om. τοῦ χριστοῦ (2°), ‘the teaching’ (NAB), for ‘the teaching of 
the Christ.’ 
II 6 λέγων γάρ (NAB), for ὁ γὰρ λέγων. 
12 γενέσθαι (NAB), for ἐλθεῖν. 
ὑμῶν (probably) (AB), for ἡμῶν. 
πεπληρωμένη ἡ (SB), for ἦ πεπληρωμένη. 
13 om. ᾿Αμήν (NAB). 
THe TuirD EPIsTLe. 3 Joun. 
4 χάριν (probably), favour (B), for χαράν, joy. 
év+ τῇ ἀληθείᾳ (ABC*), ‘in the truth,’ for ‘in truth.’ 
5 τοῦτο, this (4. ΒΟ), for εἰς τούς, to the. 
7 ἐθνικῶν (RABC), for ἐθνῶν. 


lit TEXT. 


8 ὑπολαμβάνειν (NABC*), to welcome, tor ἀπολαμβάτειν, to receive. 
9 ἔγραψά - τι΄ (ΔΑ ΒΟ), ‘I wrote somewhat,’ for ‘1 wrote.’ 
11 om. δέ, but (NABC). 
12 οἶδας, thow knowest (Δ ΒΟ), for οἴδατε, ye know. 
13 γράψαι σοι for γράφειν (NABC). 
γράφειν for γράψαι ( Δ. ΒΟ). 
14 σὲ ἰδεῖν for ἰδεῖν σε (ABC). 
The text The text of B maintains the first place as before. It has only 
es one error in 2 John, the omission of τοῦ before πατρός in τ΄. 4; and 
one error in 3 John, ἔγραψας for ἔγραψα in v. 9, in addition to two 
faults of writing, paprvpovy for μαρτυρούντων, v. 3 (at the end of a 


line), and ov for ous, τ. 6. 


The text The text of δὲ has numerous errors and false readings : 
of δ, 
2Jonx. THe Seconp EpIstie. 


3 ἀπὸ θεοῦ...καὶ I. X. x*. 

+ αὐτοῦ΄ τοῦ πατρός, N* corr. N. 
4 ἔλαβον. 
ἀλλ᾽ + ἐντολὴν΄ ἦν. 


on 


6 ἡ ἐντολὴ + αὐτοῦ΄. 
περιπατήσητε. 
7 om. 6’ ἀντίχριστος. 
8 ἀπόλησθε 8* corr. NS. 
12 ἔχω N* A*, 
στόμα - τι΄ N*. 
Joux. Tue Tuirp EPIstLe. 
8 ἐκκλησίᾳ for ἀληθείᾳ δι ἢ (so A). 
10 om. ἐκ. 


" 
15 ασπασαι. 


The text There are, as in the first Epistle, many peculiar readings in A, 
of - : ὑὸς 
a some found also in the Latin Vulgate : 
2Jonn. Tue Srconp EpIste. 
3 ᾽ Ν ΄ 
I οὐκ ἐγὼ δέ, 
2 ἐνοικοῦσαν for μένουσαν. 


3 om. ἔσται μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν. 


TEXT. ΠῚ 


4 ἀπό ἴον παρα. 
9 τὸν υἱὸν καὶ τὸν πατέρα Ve. 
12 γράψαι. 
ἐλπίζω yap vg. 
THe Tuirp EPpIstLe. 3 Joux. 
om. ov. 
5 ἐργάζῃ. 
8 ἐκκλησίᾳ (so δὲ ἢ). 
Io ἄν. 
13 οὐκ ἐβουλήθην. 
(15 οἱ ἀδελφοῦ). 
There is also an unusual number of peculiar readings in the The text 
part of the third Epistle preserved in C: le 
4 τούτων χαρὰν οὐκ ἔχω. 
6 ποιήσας προπέμψεις. 
7 ἐθνικῶν om. τῶν. 
10 φλυαρώῶν εἰς ἡμᾶς. 
(ἐπιδεχομένους). 
12 ὑπὸ αὐτῆς τῆς ἐκκλησίας καὶ τῆς ἀληθείας. 


The readings of the Latin Vulgate do not offer anything of The text 
of the 


special interest : Latin Vul- 
ate. 
THE Second EPistLe. steak 
3 Sit nobiscum (vobiscum) gratia. 
a Christo Jesu. 
Tue Tuirp Epist ye. 3 Joun. 


4 majorem horum non habeo gratiam. 
5 et hoc in. 
9 scripsissem forsitan. 
Some Latin copies have a singular addition after 2 John τα: 


ecce prodixi vobis ne in diem domini condemnemint. 


II. AUTHORSHIP. 


The second and third Epistles of St John are reckoned by These 
: Epistl 
Eusebius among ‘the controverted books’ in the same rank as the id 


liv 


among 
‘the con- 
troverted 
Books.’ 


External 
evidence. 


The title 
‘the El- 
der’ likely 
to create 
confusion. 


AUTHORSHIP. 


Epistles of St James, St Jude and 2 Peter’, ‘as well known and 
recognised by most.’ He does not give the authority or the exact 
ground of the doubt, but states the question generally as being 
‘whether they belong to the Evangelist, or possibly to another of 
the same name”.’ 

The Epistles are not contained in the Peshito Syriac Version, 
nor are they accepted by the Syrian Church. Origen was aware 
that ‘all did not allow them to be genuine’®.’ There is however no 
other ante-Nicene evidence against their authenticity. They are 
noticed as ‘received in the Catholic Church’ in the Muratorian 
Canon. This at least appears to be the most probable explanation of 
the clause. Comp. Hist. of N. 7. Canon, p. 537. They were included 
in the Old Latin Version. Clement of Alexandria wrote short notes 
upon them*. TIrenzus quotes the second Epistle as St John’s, and 
once quotes a phrase from it as from the first Epistle’. There are 
no quotations from either of the Epistles in Origen, Tertullian, or 
Cyprian, but Dionysius of Alexandria clearly recognises them as the 
works of St John; and Aurelius, an African Bishop, quoted the 
second Epistle as ‘St John’s Epistle’ at a Council where Cyprian 
was present. 

It is not dificult to explain the doubt as to their authorship, 
which was felt by some. They probably had a very limited circula- 
tion from their personal (or narrow) destination. When they were 
carried abroad under the name of John, the title of ‘the elder’ was 
not unlikely to mislead the readers. Papias had spoken of ‘an 
elder John’; and so it was natural to suppose that the John who 
so styled himself in the Epistles was the one to whom Papias 
referred, and not the Apostle. Eusebius may refer to this con- 


jecture, though it does not appear distinctly before the time of 


1H. E. ui. 25 τῶν δὲ ἀντιλεγομένων 
γνωρίμων δ᾽ οὖν ὅμως τοῖς πολλοῖς. 

5. ς. εἴτε τοῦ εὐαγγελιστοῦ τυγχάνου- 
σαι εἴτε καὶ ἑτέρον ὁμωνύμου ἐκείνῳ. 
He argued from them himself as being 
written by St John: Demonstr. Ev. 
111. 5. 

3 In Joh. Tom. v. ap. Euseb, H. E. 


VI. 23. 

1 Euseb. H. 1. νι. 
Il. 15. 

5 ddv. her. 1. 16. 8, in predicta 
Epistola, having quoted in § 5, 1 John 
ii. 18 ff. Comp. 1. 16. 3 ᾿Ιωάννης ὁ τοῦ 
κυρίου μαθητής. 


14. Cf. Strom. 


AUTHORSHIP. lv 


Jerome’. But this view of the authorship of the Epistles is purely 
conjectural, There is not the least direct evidence external or 
internal in its favour ; and it is most unlikely that ‘the elder Jolin ’ 
would be in such a position as to be described by the simple title 
‘ the elder,’ which denotes a unique preéminence. 

On the other hand, there is nothing in the use of the title Not inap- 
6 πρεσβύτερος, ‘the elder,’ by the writer of the Epistles inconsistent oa 
with the belief that he was the Apostle St John. For too little is 
known of the condition of the Churches of Asia Minor at the close 
of the apostolic age to allow any certain conclusion to be formed as 
to the sense in which he may have so styled himself. The term 
was used by Irenzeus of those who held the highest office in the 
Church, perhaps through Asiatic usage, as of Polycarp, and of 
the early Bishops of Rome’; and the absolute use of it in the 
two Epistles cannot but mark a position wholly exceptional. One 
who could claim for himself the title ‘the elder’ must have occupied 
a place which would not necessarily be suggested by the title of 
‘an apostle’; and it is perfectly intelligible that St John should 
have used the title in virtue of which he wrote, rather than that 
which would have had no bearing upon his communication. As 
an illustration of the superintendence exercised in the Asiatic 
Churches by St John, see Euseb. H. #. 111. 23. 

Internal evidence amply confirms the general tenor of external Internal 
authority. The second Epistle bears the closest resemblance in lan- Sone 
guage and thought to the first. The third Epistle has the closest 
affinity to the second, though from its subject it is less like the first 
in general form. Nevertheless it offers many striking parallels to 
constructions and language of St John: v. 3 ἐν ἀληθείᾳ; 4 μειζοτέραν 
τούτων....ἵνα... 6, 12 μαρτυρεῖν τινι, LI ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν... οὐχ ἑώρακεν 
τὸν θεόν, 12 οἶδας ὅτι ἡ μαρτ. ἡ. ἀληθής ἐστιν. 

The use of the Pauline words προπέμπειν, εὐοδοῦσθαι and tyai- 
νειν, and of the peculiar words φλυαρεῖν, φιλοπρωτεύειν, ὕπολαμ- 
Bavew (in the sense of ‘welcome’), has no weight on the other side. 


1 Jerome however speaks of the 18). 
opinion as widely held in his time: 2 Tren. ap. Euseb. H. Z. v. 20. 24. 
opinio a plerisque tradita (de virr. ill. 


lvi 


Picture 

of the 
Church in 
the third 
Epistle. 


AUTHORSHIP. 


The complexion of the third Epistle is not Pauline; and the ex- 
ceptional language belongs to the occasion on which it was 


written. 


III. CHARACTER. 


The letters contain no direct indication of the time or place 
at which they were written. They seem to belong to the same 
period of the Apostle’s life as the first Epistle; and they were 
therefore probably written from Ephesus. 

The destination of the second Letter is enigmatic. No solution 
of the problem offered by ᾿Εκλεκτῇ Κυρίᾳ is satisfactory. Nor does 
the Letter itself offer any marked individuality of address. 

The third Letter, on the other hand, reveals a striking and 
in some respects unique picture of the condition of the early 
Church. There is a dramatic vigour in the outlines of character 
which it indicates. Gaius. and Diotrephes have distinct indi- 
vidualities ; and the reference to Demetrius comes in with natural 
force. Each personal trait speaks of a fulness of knowledge behind, 
and belongs to a living man. Another point which deserves 
notice is the view which is given of the independence of Christian 
societies. Diotrephes, in no remote corner, is able for a time to 
withstand an Apostle in the administration of his particular Church. 
On the other side, the calm confidence of St John seems to rest on 
himself more than on his official power. His presence will vindi- 
cate his authority. Once more, the growth of the Churches is as 
plainly marked as their independence. The first place in them 
has become an object of unworthy ambition. They are able and, 
as it appears, for the most part willing to maintain missionary 
teachers. 

Altogether this last glimpse of Christian life in the apostolic 
age is one on which the student may well linger. The state of 
things which is disclosed does not come near an ideal, but it wit- 


nesses to the freedom and vigour of a growing faith. 


ΙΏΑΝΟΥ A 


ΙΏΑΝΟΥ A 


O HN AIP APXHC, ὃ ἀκηκόαμεν, ὃ ἑωράκαμεν 
τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς ἡμών, ὃ ἐθεασάμεθα καὶ αἱ χεῖρες ἡμῶν 


1. Tertullian twice quotes the verse (omitting ὃ ἣν ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς) as if he read 
ὃ ἑωράκαμεν, ὃ ἀκηκόαμεν, τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς ἡμῶν ἐθεασάμεθα καὶ al χεῖρες...... (adv. Prax. 
15, quod vidimus, quod audivimus, oculis nostris vidimus et manus...... ; de An. 17). 
Probably the transposition came from v. 3. This being adopted, the omission of 
4 before ἐθεασάμεθα became necessary. The same transposition occurs in the free 
quotation contained in the Muratorian Fragment, qua vidimus oculis nostris et 
auribus audivimus et manus nostre palpaverunt hec scripsimus vobis (N. T. Canon, 


P. 535). Inv. 3 δὲ harl transpose conversely and read ὃ ἀκηκ. καὶ éwp. 


Intropuction. THE FACTS OF THE 
GOSPEL ISSUING IN FELLOWSHIP AND 
JoY. (I. I—4.) 


This preface to the Epistle corre- 
sponds in a remarkable manner with 
the preface to the Gospel (John i. 
I—18); but the two passages are 
complementary and not parallel. The 
introduction to the Gospel treats of 
the personal Word (ὁ λόγος), and so 
naturally leads up to the record of 
His work on earth: the introduction 
to the Epistle treats of the revela- 
tion of life (ὁ λόγος τῆς ζωῆς) which 
culminated in the Incarnation, and 
leads up to a view of the position and 
privileges and duties of the Christian. 
In the former the Apostle sets forth 
the Being of the Word in relation to 
God and to the world (John i. 1, 2— 
5), the historic manifestation of the 
Word generally (6—13), the Incarna- 
tion as apprehended by personal ex- 
perience (14—18). In the latter he 
states first the various parts which 
are united in the fulness of the 
apostolic testimony (1 Johni. 1); then 
he dwells specially on the historic 
manifestation of the Life (i. 2); and 
lastly, he points out the personal 


results of this manifestation (i. 3, 4). 
Thus there is a harmonious corre- 
spondence between the two sections 
regulated by the primary difference 
of subject. In each the main subject 
is described first (John i. 1, 2—5: 
1 Johni. 1): then the historical mani- 
festation of it (John 1. 6—13: 1 John 
i. 2): then its personal apprehension 
(John i, 14—18: 1 John i. 3 ἢ). 
Comp. Introd. § 7. The parallel was 
noticed by Dionysius of Alexandria 
(Euseb. . 4. vii. 25. 14 f.). 

* That which was from the begin- 
ning, that which we have heard, 
that which we have seen with our 
eyes, that which we beheld and our 
hands handled, concerning the word 
of life— and the life was mani- 
Jested, and we have seen, and bear 
witness, and declare unto you the 
life, even the life eternal, which was 
with the Father and was manifested 
to us—3 that which we have seen and 
heard (1 say) declare we unto you 
also, that you also may have fellow- 
ship with us; yea and our fellowship 
ts with the Father, and with his Son 
Jesus Christ ; 4 and these things write 
we that our (your) joy may be ful- 
ρα. 

I—2 


4 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


St John throughout this section 
uses the plural (contrast ii. 1, 7, &c.) 
as speaking in the name of the apo- 
stolic body of which he was the last 
surviving representative. 

1—3. That which was...that which 
we have seen and heard declare we... 
The construction of the passage is 
broken by the parenthesis of 2. 2, 
which may for the moment be dis- 
missed from consideration. The be- 
ginning of v. 3 (6 éwpak. καὶ ἀκηκ.) thus 
stands out clearly as a resumption of 
the construction and (in part) of the 
words of v. 1. The relatives in the 
two verses (ὃ ἀκηκ., ὃ ἑωράκ.) must 
therefore be identical in meaning; 
and the simple resumptive clause gives 
the clue to the interpretation of the 
original more complex clause. Now 
in v. 3 there can be no doubt 
that the relative 6 is strictly neuter, 
‘that which’: it can have no direct 
personal reference. The sense is per- 
fectly simple: ‘that which we have... 
heard, we declare...” If to such a 
sentence the phrase, ‘concerning the 
word of life’ (περὶ τοῦ λόγου τῆς ζωῆς) 
be added, there can still be no doubt 
as to the meaning. ‘Zhe word af 
life’ is the subject as to which the 
Apostle has gained the knowledge 
which he desires to communicate to 
others: ‘that which we...have heard 
concerning the word of life we de- 
clare...’ So far the general interpre- 
tation of the passage appears to be 
quite clear; nor can the addition of 
other clauses in v. 1 alter it. What- 
ever view be adopted as to the mean- 
ing of the phrase, ‘the ecord of life, 
it can only be taken, according to the 
natural structure of the sentence, as 
the object of the various modes of 
regard successively enumerated. The 
apparent harshness of combining the 
clause ‘concerning the word of life’ 
with ‘that which was from the begin- 
ning, and ‘that which...our hands 
handled, is removed by the inter- 
vening phrases; and the preposition 
(περί) ‘concerning, ‘in regard to,’ is 


[I. 1 


comprehensive in its application. The 
ordinary construction by which the 
clause is treated as co-ordinate with 
the clauses which precede: ‘that 
which was from the beginning, that 
which we hace heard...even concern- 
ing the word of life...we declare to 
you, seems to be made impossible (1) 
by the resumptive words in 2. 3, (2) by 
the break after v. 1, (3) by the ex- 
treme abruptness of the change in the 
form of the object of we declare. 

1. The contents of this verse cor- 
respond closely with John i. 1, 9, 14 
In the beginning was the Word... 
There was the Light, the true Light, 
which lighteth every man, coming 
into the World... And the Word 
became flesh... But, as has been 
already noticed, here the thought 
is of the revelation and not of the 
Person. 

ὃ ἦν...ὃ ἀκηκ., ὃ éwp., ὃ ἐθ...ἐψηλά- 
φησαν] That which was...that which 
.. that which...that which...handled. 
These four clauses, separated by the 
repeated relative, which follow one 
another in a perfect sequence from 
the most abstract (ὃ ἦν ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς) to 
the most material aspect of divine 
revelation (ὃ ἐθ.. αἱ x. ἐψηλάφησαν), 
bring into distinct prominence the 
different elements of the apostolic 
message. Of this, part extended to 
the utmost limits of time, being abso- 
lutely when time began: part was 
gradually unfolded in the course of 
human history. The succession of 
tenses marks clearly three parts of 
the message: that which was (ἦν)... 
that which we have heard (ἀκηκόαμεν) 
way that which we beheld...(é6ceaca- 
peOa...). That which we understand 
by the eternal purpose of God (Eph. 
i. 4), the relation of the Father to 
the Son (John xvii. 5), the accept- 
ance of man in the Beloved (Eph. i. 
6), wcas already, and entered as a 
factor into the development of finite 
being, when the succession of life 
began (ἦν ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς, was from the be- 
ginning). But these truths were gra- 


I. 1] 


dually realised in the course of ages, 
through the teaching of patriarchs, 
lawgivers, and prophets, and lastly of 
the Son Himself, Whose words are still 
pregnant with instruction (ὃ ἀκηκόαμεν, 
which we have heard); aud above 
all, through the Presence of Christ, 
the lessons of Whose Life abide un- 
changeable with the Church and are 
realised in its life (ὃ ἑωράκαμεν τοῖς 
ὀφθαλμοῖς ἡμῶν, which we have seen 
with our eyes) And this Presence 
of Christ itself, as a historic fact, was 
the presence of One truly man. The 
perfection of His manhood was attest- 
ed by the direct witness of those who 
were sensibly convinced of it (ὃ ἐθεασά- 
μεθα, x.7.d., which we beheld and our 
hands handled). All the elements 
which may be described as the eter- 
nal, the historical, the personal, belong 
to the one subject, to the fulness of 
which they contribute, even ‘the word 
of life. 

As there is a succession of time in 
the sequence of the clauses, so there 
is also a climax of personal experi- 
ence, from that which was remotest in 
apprehension to that which was most 
immediate (that which was from the 
beginning...that which our hands 
handled). 

dw ἀρχῆς] from the beginning. 
Comp. c. ii. 7 note. ‘From the 
beginning’ is contrasted with in the 
beginning (John i. 1). The latter 
marks what zas already at the initial 
point, looking to that which is eternal, 
gupra-temporal: the former looks to 
that which starting at the initial point 
has been operative in time. The 
latter deals with absolute being (ὁ 
λόγος ἣν πρὸς τὸν θεόν); the former 
with temporal development. Com- 
pare ἀπὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου (Apoc. xiii. 
8, xvii. 8; Heb. iv. 3, ix. 26) as con- 
trasted with mpd κατ. x. (John xvii. 
24; 1 Pet. i. 20). 

The absence of the definite article 
both here and in John i. 1 is to be 
traced back finally to Gen. i. 1 (UXx.). 
The beginning is not regarded as a 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 5 


definite concrete fact, but in its cha- 
racter, according to man’s apprehen- 
sion, ‘that to which we look as begin- 
ning.” The use of ἐσχάτη ὥρα in 6. 
li. 18, ἔσχαται ἡμέραι 2 Tim. iii. 1 is 
similar. Compare iii. 10 ποιεῖν Sux. 
note. 

The Greek commentators justly 
dwell on the grandeur of the claim 
which St John makes for the Chris- 
tian Revelation as coeval in some 
sense with creation: θεολογῶν ἐξηγεῖ- 
Tat μὴ νεώτερον εἶναι TO καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς μυ- 
στήριον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἀρχῆς μὲν καὶ ἀεὶ 
τυγχάνειν αὐτὸ νῦν δὲ πεφανερῶσθαι 
ἐν τῷ κυρίῳ, ὃς ἔστι ζωὴ αἰώνιος καὶ 
θεὸς ἀληθινός (Theophlet. Argum.). 
And again in a note upon the verse: 
τοῦτο καὶ πρὸς ᾿Ιουδαίους καὶ πρὸς “EX- 
Anvas οἱ ὡς νεώτερον διαβάλλουσι τὸ 
καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς μυστήριον (id. ad ἰοο.). 

The ‘hearing’ ‘ concerning the word 
of life’ is not to be limited to the 
actual preaching of the Lord dur- 
ing His visible presence, though it 
includes this. It embraces the whole 
divine preparation for the Advent 
provided by the teaching of Lawgiver 
and Prophets (comp. Heb. i. 1) ful- 
filled at last by Christ. This the 
Apostles had ‘heard’ faithfully when 
the Jewish people had not heard 
(John v. 37; Luke xvi. 29). So also 
the ‘seeing,’ as it appears, reaches be- 
yond the personal vision of the Lord. 
The condition of Jew and Gentile, 
the civil and religious institutions by 
which St John was surrounded (Acts 
xvii, 28), the effects which the Gospel 
wrought, revealed to the eye of the 
Apostle something of ‘the Life’ 
‘Hearing’ and ‘seeing’ are combined 
in the work of the seer: Apoc. xxii. 8. 

The clear reference to the Risen 
Christ in the word ‘handled, makes 
it probable that the special manifest- 
ation indicated by the two aorists 
(ἐθεασάμεθα, ἐψηλάφησαν) is that given 
to the Apostles by the Lord after the 
Resurrection, which is in fact the 
revelation of Himself as He remains 
with His Church by the Spirit. The 


6 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


two words are united with one rela- 
tive, and they express in ascending 
order the ground of the Apostle’s 
personal belief in the reality of the 
true humanity of Christ as He is (106 
beheld...and handled). 

Thus there is a survey of the 
whole course of revelation in the 
four clauses, more complete than has 
been already indicated. The personal 
experience of the Presence of Christ 
is crowned by the witness to the 
Risen Christ. This witness of what 
he had actually experienced is part 
of the message which the Apostle had 
to give (comp. Acts i. 22). The Re- 
surrection was the final revelation 
of life. At the same time the four 
clauses bind together inseparably the 
divine and human. There is, as we 
have seen, but one subject whether 
this is revealed as eternal (that which 
was from the beginning), or through 
the experience of sense (that which 
our hands handled). 

ἀκηκόαμεν] have heard, vv. 3, 5, iv. 
3; John iv. 42, v. 37, xviii. 21. The 
perfect in every case preserves its full 
force. 

ἑωράκ. τ. ὀφθ.] have seen with our 
eyes. The addition with our eyes, 
like our hands below, emphasises the 
idea of direct personal outward ex- 
perience in a matter marvellous in it- 
self. The vision was not of the soul 
within, but in life. Comp. Deut. iii. 
21, iv. 3, xi. 7, xxi. 7; Zech. ix. 8; 
Ecclus. xvi. 5. See also John xx. 27. 

On sight and hearing, see Philo, 
de Sacr. A. et C. § 22, i. 178. 

ὃ ἑωράκαμεν...ὃ ἐθεασάμεθα...] quod 
vidimus...quod perspeximus V., 
which we have seen...which we be- 
held. The general relation of these 
clauses has been touched upon al- 
ready. They offer also contrasts in 
detail. The change of tense marks 
the difference between that which was 
permanent in the lessons of the mani- 
festation of the Lord, and that which 
was once shewn to special witnesses. 
The change of the verbs also is sig- 


{I. 1 


nificant. Θεᾶσθαι, like θεωρεῖν, ex- 
presses the calm, intent, continuous 
contemplation of an object: which re- 
mains before the spectator. Comp. 
Johni.14n. On the other hand the 
emphatic addition of τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς 
ἡμῶν to ἑωράκαμεν emphasises the 
personal nature of the witness as 
ἐθεασάμεθα emphasises its exactness. 
Generally the first two verbs (heard, 
seen) express the fact, and the second 
two (beheld, handled) the definite in- 
vestigation by the observer. 

Bede (ad loc.) brings out the 
moral element in ἐθεασάμεθα: Non 
solum quippe corporalibus  oculis 
sicut ceteri Dominum viderunt sed et 
perspexerunt, cujus divinam quoque 
virtutem spiritualibus oculis cerne- 
bant. : 

ἐψηλάφησαν] contrectaverunt V. 
(all. tractaverunt, palpaverunt, per- 
scrutate sunt), handled. There can 
be no doubt that the exact word is 
used with a distinct reference to the 
invitation of the Lord after His Re- 
surrection: Handle me... (Luke xxiv. 
39 ψηλαφήσατέ pe). The tacit re- 
ference is the more worthy of notice 
because St John does not mention 
the fact of the Resurrection in his 
Epistle; nor does he use the word in 
his own narrative of the Resurrec- 
tion. From early times it has been 
observed that St John used the term 
to mark the solid ground of the 
Apostolic conviction: ov yap ὡς ἔτυχε 
συγκατεθέμεθα τῷ ὀφθέντι (Theophlct. 
ad loc.). 

περὶ τοῦ λόγου τῆς ζωῆς] de verbo 
vite V. (de sermone vite, Tert.), 
concerning the word of life, that is 
the message of life, or, according 
to the more modern idiom, the 
revelation of life. The word (6 
λόγος) conveys the notion of a con- 
nected whole (sermo), and is not 
merely an isolated utterance (ῥῆμα᾽ 
comp. John vi. 68 ῥήματα ζωῆς 
αἰωνίου). Hence the word of life is 
the whole message from God to man, 
which tells of life, or, perhaps, out of 


1. 1] 


which life springs, which beginning to 
be spoken by the prophets, was at 
last fully proclaimed by one who was 
His Son (Hebr. i. 1, 2). Christ is, in- 
deed, Himself raz Worp, but in the 
present passage the obvious reference 
is to the whole Gospel, of which He 
is the centre and sum, and not to 
Himself personally. This follows both 
from the context and from the ap- 
pended genitive (τῆς ζωῆς). It is the 
life and not the word which is said 
to have been manifested; and again 
in the four passages where ὁ λόγος is 
used personally (John i. 1 ter, 14) the 
term is absolute. On the other hand 
we have ὁ λόγος τῆς βασιλείας (Matt. 
xiii, 19), ὁ λόγος τῆς σωτηρίας ταύτης 
(Acts xiii. 26), ὁ λόγος τῆς χάριτος 
αὐτοῦ (Acts xx. 32), ὁ λόγος ὁ τοῦ 
σταυροῦ (2 Cor. i. 18), ὁ λόγος τῆς 
καταλλαγῆς (2 Cor. v. 19), ὁ λόγος τῆς 
ἀληθείας τοῦ εὐαγγελίου (Col. i 5), ὁ 
λόγος τῆς ἀληθείας (2 Tim. ii, 15; 
comp. Ady. ἀληθείας James i. 18), in 
all of which the genitive describes 
the subject of the tidings or record. 
There can then be no reason for de- 
parting from the general analogy of 
this universal usage here, since it 
gives an admirable sense, and the 
personal interpretation of ‘the word 
of life’ is not supported by any pa- 
rallel. Moreover, a modification of the 
phrase itself occurs in St Paul, λόγον 
ζωῆς ἐπέχειν (Phil. ii. 16: compare 
also Titus i. 2, 3 ἐπ᾽ ἐλπίδι ζωῆς αἰω- 
viov ἣν ἐπηγγείλατο...ἐφανέρωσεν δέ... 
τὸν λόγον αὐτοῦ...: John vi. 68; Acts 
v. 20). The personal interpretation 
could not fail to present itself to later 
readers, in whose speculation ‘the 
Word’ occupied a far larger place 
than it occupies in the writings of St 
John, and to become popular. In a 
most true sense Christ is the gospel ; 
and the name of the triumphant con- 
queror in Apoc. xix. 13 (ὁ λόγος τοῦ 
θεοῦ - comp. Acts vi. 7, xv. 6 &c.) shews 
the natural transition in meaning from 
‘the Word of God’ to Him who is ‘the 
Word of God’ Comp. John x. 35. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 7 


The Peshito Syriac (not Harel.) ap- 
pears to support the interpretation 
which has been given; that which is 
the word of life. 

The sense of the genitive τῆς ζωῆς, 
of life, is doubtful. According to 
general usage noticed above, it would 
specify the contents of the message : 
‘the revelation which proclaims and 
presents life to men.’ It must how- 
ever be noticed that in other con- 
nexions St John uses the words (τῆς 
ζωῆς) to describe the character of 
that to which they are applied, as 
life-giving, or life-sustaining: τὸ ξύλον 
τῆς ζωῆς (Apoc. ii. 7 &e.), ὁ στέφανος 
τῆς ζωῆς (Apoc. ii. 10), ζωῆς πηγαὶ 
ὑδάτων (Apoc. Vii. 17), τὸ ὕδωρ τῆς ζωῆς 
(Apoc. xxi. 6 &¢.), ἡ βίβλος τῆς ζωῆς 
(Apoe. iii. 5 &c.), and more particu- 
larly ὁ ἄρτος τῆς ζωῆς (John vi. 35), 
τὸ φῶς τῆς ζωῆς (John viii. 12), which 
suggest such a sense as ‘the life- 
containing, life-communicating word.’ 
The context here, which speaks of the 
manifestation of the life, appears at 
first sight to require the former inter- 
pretation; for it is easy to pass from 
the idea of the life as the subject of 
the divine revelation to the life made 
manifest, while the conception of /ife 
as characteristic of the word does 
not prepare the way for the transition 
so directly. On the other side the 
usage of the Gospel is of great weight; 
and it is not difficult to see how the 
thought of the revelation, which from 
first to last was inspired by and dif- 
fused life, leads to the thought that 
the life itself was personally mani- 
fested. 

It is most probable that the two 
interpretations are not to be sharply 
separated, The revelation proclaims 
that which it includes; it has, an- 
nounces, gives life. In Christ life 
as the subject and life as the cha- 
racter of the Revelation were abso- 
lutely united. See Additional Note 
on v. 20. 

The preposition (περί) is used in a 
wide sense, ‘in regard to,’ ‘in the 


8 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[I. 2 


΄ im =~ es Voie \ 
ἐψηλάφησαν, περὶ τοῦ λόγου τῆς ζωῆς, --- καὶ ἡ ζωὴ 


matter of.’ Comp. John xvi. 8. The 
subject is not simply a message, 
but all that had been made clear 
through manifold experience ‘con- 
cerning’ it. 

If we now look back over the verse 
it is not difficult to see why St John 
chose the neuter form (that which 
was and not Him that was), and why 
he limited the record of his experience 
by the addition concerning the word 
of life. He does not announce Christ 
or the revelation of life, but he an- 
nounces something relating to both. 
Christ is indeed the one subject of 
his letter, yet not the Person of 
Christ absolutely but what he had 
himself come directly to know of 
Him. Nor yet again does the apostle 
write all that he had come to know of 
Christ by manifold intercourse, but 
just so much as illustrated the whole 
revelation of life (comp. John xx. 
30 f.). His pastoral is not a Gospel 
nor a dogmatic exposition of truth, 
but an application of the Truth to 
life. 

2. The whole verse is parenthetical. 
Elsewhere St John interrupts the 
construction by the introduction of a 
reflective comment (Ὁ. 3b; ¢. it 27, 
John i. 14, 16, iii, 1, 16 ff, 31 ff, xix. 
35, 2 John 2), and pauses after some 
critical statement to consider and 
realise its significance. And so here 
the mention of the whole ‘revelation 
of life which extends throughout time, 
leads him to rest for a moment upon 
the one supreme fact up to which or 
from which all revelation comes. ‘Con- 
cerning the word of life,’ he seems to 
say, ‘Yes, concerning that revelation 
which deals with life and which brings 
life in all its manifold relations; and 
yet while our thoughts embrace this 
vast range which it includes, we may 
never forget that the life itself was 
shewn to us in a personal form. What 
we have to declare is not a word 
(λόγος) only: it is a fact,’ 


The simple statement is given first 
(the life was manifested), and then 
subject and predicate are more fully 
explained (‘the life eternal which 
was with the Father, ‘was mani- 
Jested to us’). The phrase, the life 
was manifested, recals the correspond- 
ing phrase in the prologue to the 
Gospel, the Word became flesh. The 
latter regards the single fact of the 
Incarnation of the Word Who ‘ was 
God’; this regards the exhibition in its 
purity and fulness of the divine move- 
ment. And yet further, in the Gospel 
St John speaks directly of a Person: 
here he is speaking of the revelation 
which he had received of the energy 
of a Person. The full difference is felt 
if for ἃ moment the predicates are 
transferred. The reality of the In- 
carnation would be undeclared if it 
were said: ‘the Word was mani- 
fested’; the manifoldness of the ope- 
rations of life would be circumscribed 
if it were said: ‘the life became flesh” 
The manifestation of the life was a 
consequence of the Incarnation of the 
Word, but it is not co-extensive with 
it. 

καὶ ἡ ζωή] and the life.... This 
use of the simplest conjunction (καί) 
is characteristic of St John. It seems 
to mark the succession of contempla- 
tion as distinguished from the se- 
quence of reasoning. Thought is 
added to thought as in the interpre- 
tation of a vast scene open all at once 
before the eyes, of which the parts 
are realised one after the other. 

ἡ Con] the life, John xiv. 6n., xi. 
25n. The usage of the word in John 
i. 4 is somewhat different. Here life 
is regarded as final and absolute: 
there life is the particular revelation 
of life given in finite creation. Christ 
is the life which He brings, and 
which is realised by believers iz Him. 
In Him ‘the life’ became visible. 
Comp. 6. v. 11, 12, 20; Col, iii, 4; 
Rom. v. το, vi. 23; 2 Cor. iv. 10; 


1. 2] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 9 


2 , \oe , a 
ἐφανερώθη, και EWOAKAMEV καὶ μαρτυρουμεν καὶ ἀπαγ- 


2. καὶ ὃ ἑωράκαμεν, Β (ἑορ.); καὶ ὃ ἑωρ. μαρτ. Dion Alex. (Migne, P. Gr. x. 1248). 
The insertion or omission of 0 before εορᾶκδλλεν (80 B) was equally easy; but 
ἐφανερώθη seems to require the direct connexion of ἑωράκαμεν with τὴν £ τ. al. 


2 Tim. i. 1. But the term ‘the life’ 
is not to be regarded as simply a per- 
sonal name equivalent to the Word: 
it expresses one aspect of His Being 
and Working. Looking to Him we 
see under the conditions of present 
human being the embodied ideal of 
life, which is fellowship with God and 
with man in God. 

ἐφανερώθη] manifestata est V. (be- 
low apparuit), was manifested. The 
word is used of the revelation of the 
Lord at His first coming (c. iii. 5, 8; 
John i. 31; comp. ὁ. iv. 9; John vii. 
4; 1 Pet. i. 20; 1 Tim. iii. 16; Heb. 
ix. 26); of His revelation after the 
Resurrection (John xxi. 14, 1; [Mark] 
xvi. 12, 14); and of the future revela- 
tion (c. 11. 28; comp. 1 Pet. v. 4; Col. 
iii 4). In all these ways the Word 
Incarnate and glorified is made known 
as ‘the Life.’ 

ἑωράκαμεν ... μαρτυροῦμεν ... ἀπαγγέλ- 
λομεν...] seen...bear witness... de- 
clare... The three verbs give in due 
sequence the ideas of personal expe- 
rience, responsible affirmation, autho- 
ritative announcement, which are 
combined in the apostolic message. 
The first two verbs are probably used 
absolutely, though the object of the 
third (the life eternal) is potentially 
included in them. Comp. John i. 34, 
xix. 35. So Augustine, ct vidimus et 
testes sumus. 

ἑωράκαμεν] John xix. 35, i. 34, xiv. 
7,9. It is worthy of notice that this 
is the only part of the verb which is 
used by St John in the Gospel and 
Epistles (ὅρα μή, Apoc. xix. 10; xxii. 
9: not xviii, 18; nor John vi. 2); 
and in these books it is singularly 
frequent. 

Severus (Cramer Cat. ad loc.), com- 
paring these words with iv. 12 θεὸν 


οὐδεὶς πώποτε τεθέαται, no man hath 
beheld God at any time, remarks: τῷ 
σεσαρκῶσθαι καὶ ἐπηνθρωπηκέναι θεα- 
τὸς καὶ ψηλαφητὸς γενέσθαι εὐδόκησεν 
[ὁ λόγος], οὐχ ὃ ἦν θεαθεὶς καὶ ψηλα- 
φηθεὶς ἀλλ᾽ ὃ γέγονεν" εἷς γὰρ ὑπάρχων 
καὶ ἀδιαίρετος ὁ αὐτὸς ἦν καὶ θεατὸς καὶ 
ἀθέατος καὶ ἁφῇ μὴ ὑποπίπτων καὶ ψη- 
λαφώμενος... 

μαρτυροῦμεν] Comp. iv. 14; John 
xxi. 24. For the characteristic use of 
the idea of witness in St John see 
Introd. to Gospel of St John, pp. 
xliv. ff 

Augustine dwells on the associa- 
tions of the Greek μάρτυρες which 
were lost in the Latin testes: Ergo 
hoc dixit Vidimus et testes sumus: 
Vidimus et martyres sumus; testimo- 
nium enim dicendo...cum displiceret 
ipsum testimonium hominibus adver- 
sus quos dicebatur, passi sunt omnia 
que passi sunt martyres (ad loc.). 

ἀπαγγέλλομεν) adnunciamus V., we 
declare. The word occurs again in 
St John’s writings in John xvi. 25 
(it is falsely read iv. 51, xx. 18). In 
the Synoptists and Acts it is not un- 
common in the sense of ‘ bearing back 
a message from one to another.’ This 
fundamental idea underlies the use 
here and in John xvi. 25. The mes- 
sage comes from a Divine Presence 
and expresses a divine purpose. 

Comp. 1 Cor. xiv. 25; Heb. ii. 12 
(LXX.); Ὁ. 5 note. 

The application of the words must 
not be confined to the Epistle, which 
is in fact distinguished from the gene- 
ral proclamation of the Gospel (2. 4, 
καὶ ταῦτα γράφομεν), but rather under- 
stood of the whole apostolic ministry. 
More particularly perhaps we may see 
a description of that teaching which 
St John embodied in his Gospel. 


10 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[I. 2 


- A > ᾧ' dl > A \ 
γέλλομεν ὑμῖν τὴν ζωὴν τὴν αἰωνιον ἥτις Nv προς TOV 


τὴν ¢ τὴν ai] the eternal life, more 
exactly, the life, even the life eternal. 
The phrase used in the beginning of 
the verse is first taken up and then 
more fully developed. This form of 
expression in which the two elements 
of the idea are regarded separately is 
found in the N.T. only here and in 
ii. 25. The simpler form ἡ αἰώνιος ζωή 
is also very rare (John xvii. 3; Acts 
xiii. 46; 1 Tim. vi. 12), and in each 
case where it occurs describes the 
special Messianic gift brought by 
Christ (the eternal life) as distin- 
guished from the general conception 
(ζωὴ αἰώνιος, life eternal). 

This ‘eternal life’ is seen in this 
passage to be the divine life, the life 
that 7s and which was visibly shewn 
in Christ, and not merely an unending 
continuance (Heb. vii. 16, ¢ ἀκατάλυ- 
tos). Comp. John xvii. 3. The equiva- 
lent phrase appears to occur first in 


Dan. xii, 2 (δὲν 50). Comp. 2 


Mace. vii. 9 εἰς αἰώνιον ἀναβίωσιν ζωῆς 
ἡμᾶς ἀναστήσει. 

For the use of the article (ἡ ᾧ ἡ 
ai.) see 6. ii. 7 (ἡ evr. ἡ π.)} note; and 
for the idea of ‘eternal life’ the Ad- 
ditional Note on v. 20, 

ἥτις qv...) which was.... This clause 
not only defines but in part confirms 
the former statement. The relative 
is not the simple relative (7), but the 
‘qualitative’ relative (τις). Comp. 
John viii. 53 (ὅστις ἀπέθανεν); Apoc. 
i. 7; ti. 24; xi. 8; xx. 4. ‘We de- 
clare with authority’—such is the 
apostle’s meaning—‘ the life which is 
truly eternal, seeing that the life of 
which we speak was with the Father, 
and so is independent of the condi- 
tions of time; and it was manifested 
to us apostles, and so has been brought 
within the sphere of our knowledge.’ 

ἦν πρὸς τ. π.] erat apud patrem 
V., was with the Father. Comp. 
John i. 1, 2. The life was not ‘in the 
Father, nor in fellowship (μετά) or in 


combination (σύν) with Him, but real- 
ised with Him for its object and law 
(ἦν πρός). That which is true of the 
Word as a Person, is true necessarily 
of the Word in action, and so of the 
Life which finds expression in action. 
The verb (ἦν) describes continuous 
and not past existence; or rather, it 
suggests under the forms of human 
thought an existence which is beyond 
time (Apoe. iv. 11 ἦσαν; John i. 3 f.). 
τὸν πατέρα] The Father, the title 
of God when regarded relatively, as 
the ‘One God, of whom (ἐξ od) are 
all things’ (1 Cor. viii. 6). The rela- 
tion itself is defined more exactly 
either in reference to the material 
world: James i. 17 ὁ πατὴρ τῶν φώτων; 
or to men: Matt. v. 16 ὁ πατὴρ ὑμῶν, 
&c.; or, more commonly and pecu- 
liarly, to our Lord, ‘the Son’: Matt. 
vii. 21 6 πατήρ pov, &c. The difference 
of the paternal relation of the One 


‘Father to Christ and to Christians is 


indicated in a very remarkable man- 
ner in John xx. 17 (ἀναβαίνω πρὸς τὸν 
πατέρα μου καὶ mat. ὑμῶν) where the 
unity of the Person is shewn by the 
one article common to the two clauses, 
and the distinctness of the relations 
by the repetition of the title with the 
proper personal pronoun. The simple 
title ὁ πατήρ occurs rarely in the Syn- 
optic Gospels, and always with refer- 
ence to ‘the Son’: Matt. xi. 27 || Luke 
x. 22; Matt. xxiv. 36|| Mark xiii. 32; 
Luke ix. 26; Matt. xxiii. 19. (But 
comp. Luke xi. 13 ὁ π. 6 ἐξ οὐρανοῦ ; 
the usage in Matt. xi. 26||Luke x. 
21; Mark xiv. 36 is different.) In the 
Acts it is found only in the opening 
chapters; i. 4, 7; ii 33. In St Paul 
only Rom. vi. 4 (7yép6n...dua τῆς δόξης 
τοῦ m.); τ Cor. viii. 6 (εἷς θεὸς ὁ πατήρ); 
Eph. ii. 18 (τὴν προσαγωγὴν.. πρὸς τὸν 
πατέρα); Col. i. 122; (Rom. viii. 15 
|| Gal. iv. 6) and not at all in the 
Epistles of St Peter, St James or St 
Jude, or in the Apocalypse. In St 
John’s Gospel, on the contrary, and in 


1.3] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. II 


ὃ: Ὁ ὦκὰ “ὃ com 3a fs ΄ \ 2 
σπάτερα και ἐφανερω ny ἡμιν,--ὁὸ EWOAKAULEV Kat ακῆη- 


/ > , Ne on .“ Vice - y 
κοαμεν ἀπαγγελλομεν Kal ὑμῖν, iva καὶ ὑμεῖς κοινωνίαν 


3. ὃ ἀκηκ. καὶ éwp. δὲ harl: see v. 1. 
ὑμῖν, S vg me. -δὲ 5 O*. 
(ἕνα... ἔχητε καὶ ἢ ἡ κοινωνία ἡ ἡμετέρα....). 


his Epistles (i. ii.) the term is very 
frequent (1 Ep.i.2f.; ii, 1,13, 15,18, 
22ff.; 11. 1; iv. 14. 2 Ep. 3, 4, 9). 
Comp. John iv. 21 add. note; and the 
additional note on this passage. 

In this place the idea of Father- 
hood comes into prominence in con- 
nexion with life (the life was with the 
Father). In the Gospel the absolute 
idea of Godhead is placed in con- 
nexion with the Word (John i. 1 6A. ἦν 
πρὸς tov θεόν͵ the Word was with 
God). In both passages a glimpse 
is given of the essential relations of 
the Divine Persons, and we learn that 
the idea of Father lies in the Deity 
itself and finds fulfilment in the 
Deity. The simplest conception which 
we can form of God in Himself as 
absolutely perfect and_ self-sufficing 
includes Tripersonality. 

ἐφαν. ἡμῖν] apparutt nobis V. (ma- 
nifestata est in nobis Aug., palam 
Jacta est, &c. all.) was manifested to 
us. The general statement given be- 
fore (was manifested) is made per- 
sonal. Actual experience is the found- 
ation of St John’s testimony. 

3. In the parenthesis (Ὁ. 2) St John 
has described the subject of his mes- 
sage as ‘the life eternal’: he now 
describes it as ‘that which we have 
seen and heard.’ The fulness of apo- 
stolic experience, the far-reaching 
knowledge of the Son of God, is in- 
deed identical with the life. By ap- 
propriating that knowledge of the 
Son the life is appropriated. 

Life is manifested in fellowship ; 
and in regarding the end of his mes- 
sage St John looks at once to a two- 
fold fellowship, human and divine, a 
fellowship with the Church and with 
God. He contemplates first the fel- 


+kal’ drayy. 8 am. — kal’ 


Hence Aug. Ambr. vg et societas nostra sit 


lowship which exists in the Christian 
body itself, and then rises from this 
to the thought of the wider privileges 
of such fellowship as resting on a 
divine basis. Manifeste ostendit B. 
Johannes quia quicunque societatem 
cum Deo habere desiderant primo 
ecclesize societati debent adunari.... 
(Bede). 

ὃ éwp. καὶ ἀκηκ.] that which we 
have seen and heard... The transpo- 
sition of the verbs in this resumptive 
clause (v. 1 heard...seen...) is natural 
and significant. Before the Apostle 
was advancing up to the Incarnation, 
now he is starting from it. At the 
same time the two elements of ex- 
perience are brought together and 
not (as before) separated by the re- 
peated relative (9. 1 that which...that 
which...). 

καὶ ὑμῖν] unto you also. The reve- 
lation was not for those only to whom 
it was first given; but for them also 
who ‘had not seen’ The message 
was for ‘them also’ that ‘they also’ 
might enjoy the fruits of it. There is 
no redundance in the repeated καί. 

This thought is well brought out 
by Augustine, who asks the question: 
Minus ergo sumus felices quam illi 
qui viderunt et audierunt? and an- 
swers it by recalling the history of St 
Thomas (John xx. 26f£) who rose by 
Faith above touch: Tetigit hominem, 
confessus est Deum. Et Dominus 
consolans nos qui ipsum jam in czlo 
sedentem manu contrectare non pos- 
sumus sed fide contingere, ait illi 
Quia vidisti credidisti, beati qui non 
viderunt et credunt. Nos descripti 
sumus, nos designati sumus. Fiat 
ergo in nobis beatitudo quam Domi- 
nus preedixit futuram: manifestata est 


12 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[1.4 


af > ε ΄ Ve 7 Ne ὁ , κ mm, 
ἔχητε μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν" καὶ ἡ κοινωνία δὲ ἡ ἥμετερα μετὰ TOU 


Is καὶ ὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ" “καὶ 
πατρὸς καὶ μετὰ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιησον ἄριστον 


ipsa vita in carne...ut res quz solo 
corde videri potest videretur et oculis, 
ut corda sanaret (Aug. ad loc.). 

ἵνα..«μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν] ut et vos societatem 
habeatis nobiscum V., that ye also 
may hace fellowship with us, 1.6. 
‘may be united with us, the apostolic 
body, in the bonds of Christian com- 
munion’ (comp. vv. 6, 7; iv. 6) by the 
apprehension of the fulnessof the truth; 
that you may enjoy to the uttermost 
by spiritual power what we gained in 
the outward experience of life (John 
xx. 29. The last of the apostles 
points to the unbroken succession of 
the heritage of Faith. It will be 
observed that St John always assumes 
that ‘knowledge’ carries with it the 
corresponding action (eg. ii. 3). The 
words cannot without violence be 
made to give the sense: ‘that ye may 
have the same fellowship [with God 
and Christ] as we have.’ 

The phrase κοινωνίαν ἔχειν, as dis- 
tinguished from the simple verb κοι- 
vevetv (2 John 11; 1 Pet. iv. 13; Phil. 
iv. 15), expresses not only the mere 
fact, but also the enjoyment, the con- 
scious realisation, of fellowship. Comp. 
Ὁ. ὃ (ἁμαρτίαν ἔχειν) note. 

cow. μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν) fellowship with. 
The preposition (μετά) emphasises the 
mutual action of those who are united. 
Kowevia is also used with a genitive 
of the person (1 Cor. i. 9), as in the 
case of things (1 Cor. x. 16; Phil. iii. 
10), when the thought is of a blessing 
imparted by fellowship in the person, 
or of a fellowship springing from the 
person (2 Cor. xiii. 13). The word is 
also used absolutely Acts ii. 42. 

καὶ ἡ κοιν. δέ... et societas nostra sit 
V., Aug., yea and our fellowship... 
The connecting particles («ai...d¢) and 
the possessive pronoun (ἡ κ. ἡ ἡμετέ- 
pa) are both emphatic. The particles 
lay stress on the characteristics of the 
fellowship which are to be brought 


forward: the possessive in place of 
the personal pronoun marks that 
which peculiarly distinguishes Chris- 
tians rather than simply that which 
they enjoy. ‘And the fellowship itself 
in fact to which we call you, the fel- 
lowship which is truly Christian fel- 
lowship, &c.’ 

For καί...δέ... compare John vi. 51; 
viii. 16, 17; xv. 27; 3 John 12. The 
combination occurs sparingly through- 
out the N. T. The δέ serves as the 
conjunction, while καί emphasises the 
words to which it is attached. 

For ἡ κοιν. ἡ ἡμετέρα compare John 
xv. On. (ἡ dy. ἡ ἐμή), 11, 12; xvii. 13, 
24; xviii. 36, &c.; ὁ. ii. 7 note. 

The insertion of the δέ makes the 
false construction (Zatt.) ‘and that 
our fellowship may be...’ impossible. 
The whole clause is like v. 2 (see 
note), a development of the preced- 
ing idea over which the apostle lin- 
gers as it were in personal reflection. 
For the foundation of the thought see 
John xvii. 20 f. 

pera τοῦ m... I. X.] with the Father... 
his Son Jesus Christ.... The thought 
prepared in vv. 1, 2 now finds full ex- 
pression. The revelation of ‘the life’ 
had brought men into connexion with 
‘the Father.” ‘The life’ was appre- 
hended in a true human personality 
in virtue of the Incarnation, and so 
men could have fellowship with the 
life and with the source of life. 
Through the Son God was revealed 
and apprehended as Father. It must 
also be observed that ‘fellowship 
with the Father’ and ‘fellowship 
with His Son’ are directly co-ordi- 
nated (with...and with...). Such co- 
ordination implies sameness of es- 
sence. And yet further: the fellow- 
ship with the Father is not only said 
to be established through the Son: 
the fellowship with the Father is in- 
volved in fellowship with the Son 


I. 4] THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 13 
- , € ΄-“ a © Aue ~ ᾽ 4 
ταῦτα γράφομεν ἡμεῖς ἵνα ἡ χαρα ἡμῶν ἡ πεπληρωμένη. 

4. ἡμεῖς NA*B the: ὑμῖν ς΄ A**C vg syrr me. In such a ease the evidence of 
verss. is of little weight. 

(ἡ x-) ἡμῶν NB the; ὑμῶν S AC me, The later MSS. and the Latin and 
Syriac verss. are divided. The confusion of ἡμ. and ὑμ. in the best authorities is 
so constant that a positive decision on the reading here is impossible. It may be 
noticed that C*, reading ὑμῶν, adds ἐν ἡμῖν and some verss. reading ἡμῶν add 


ἐν ὑμῖν at the end of the clause. 


Comp. ii. 8, 25; iii. 1; v. 4. 


Some copies of Vulg. read ut+gaudeatis et’ gaudium vestrum (nostrum) sit 


plenum. 


(comp. ii. 23). The consummation of 
this fellowship is the ‘being in God’ 
(c. v. 20) ‘a quo fontaliter omnia pro- 
cedunt, in quo finaliter omnes sancti 
fruibiliter requiescunt’ (Th. Kemp. 
i, 15. 2). 

τοῦ υἱοῦ av. “I. X.] His Son Jesus 
Christ. By the use of this full title 
St John brings out now both aspects 
of the Lord’s Person (‘ His Son,’ ‘ Jesus 
Christ’) which he had indicated before 
(‘which was with the Father, ‘our 
hands handled’). The full title is 
found again in iii. 23; v. 20 (2); 2 
John 3; 1 Cor. i. 9; 2 Cor. i. 19. 
Compare also i. 7 (iv. 153 v. 5); I 
Thess. i. 10; Heb. iv. 14. In each 
case it will be seen to be significant 
in all its elements. 

4. «ai ταῦτα] and these things. 
The apostolic message which had 
been regarded before in its unity (6 
that which) is now regarded in some 
special aspects of its manifold power. 
St John embraces in ‘the vision of 
his heart’ (Eph. i. 18) all that his 
letter contains, though it was then 
unwritten. 

The phrase, these things, is not how- 
ever co-extensive with that which. 
St John has present to his mind both 
the general revelation of the Gospel 
(we declare) of which the end was to 
create spiritual fellowship between 
God and man and men; and the par- 
ticular view of it which he purposes 
to lay before hig readers (we write) 
with a view to establishing the ful- 
ness of joy in the Church. 


γράφομεν ἡμεῖς] write we. Both 


the pronoun and the verb are em- 
phatic. The proclamation (vz. 2, 3) 
was presented in an abiding form: 
not spoken only but written, so far 
as there was need, that it might work 
its full effect. And it was written by 
those who had full authority to write. 
Nor is it fanciful to suppose that by 
the stress laid on the word write, 
which is emphasised by the absence 
of a personal object (the ¢o you of the 
common text is to be omitted), St 
John looks forward to his apostolic 
service to later ages. 

The plural (γράφομεν) which belongs 
to the form of the apostolic message 
stands in contrast with the personal 
address (γράφω) which immediately 
follows inc. ii. 1. Elsewhere in the 
epistle the verb occurs only in the 
singular (ii. 7 ἢ, 12 ff, 21, 26; v. 13). 

ἵνα ἡ χ. ἡμῶν (0. ὑμῶν) ἢ πεπληρ.] 
that our (or your) joy may be fulfilled. 
The fulfilment of Christian joy de- 
pends upon the realisation of fellow- 
ship. The same thought underlies 
the other passages where the phrase 
occurs (see next note). Fellowship 
with Christ, and fellowship with the 
brethren, fellowship with Christ in 
the brethren, and with the brethren 
in Christ, is the measure of the ful- 
ness of joy. Both readings (ἡμῶν and 
ὑμῶν) are well supported and both 
give good sense. The object of the 
apostle may be regarded either as to 
the fulfilment of his work relatively to 
himself, or as to the fulfilment of his 
work relatively to his disciples. The 
joy of the apostle as well as the joy 


14 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[L5 


© € ὦ / a / > (ἡ > ~ 
5 Καὶ ἔστιν αὕτη ἡ ἀγγελία nv ἀκηκόαμεν ἀπ᾿ αὐτου 


5. καὶ ἔστιν αὕτη NBC; καὶ αὕτη ἐστίν S A vg. 
ἡ ἀγγελία N°AB vg: ἡ ἐπαγγελία S C me the. 
δὲ had originally ἡ ἀπαγγελίας, which the scribe himself altered by letters 


written above to ἡ ἀγάπη τῆς ἐπαγγελίας. 


of the disciples is secured by the same 
result. 

ἡμῶν γὰρ ὑμῖν (cum. ὑμών.. ἡμῖν) 
κοινωνούντων πλείστην ἔχομεν τὴν χάριν 
(.-. χαρὰν) ἡμῶν, ἣν τοῖς θερισταῖς ὁ 
χαίρων σπορεὺς ἐν τῇ τοῦ μισθοῦ ἀπο- 
λήψει βραβεύσει χαιρόντων καὶ τούτων 
ὅτι τῶν πόνων αὐτῶν (1. αὐτοῦ) ἀπο- 
λαύουσι (Theophlet.). 

πεπληρωμένη] plenum(V., Aug.), ful- 
filled. The phrase is characteristic. 
Comp. 2 John 12; John iii. 29, xv. IT, 
xvi. 24; xvii. 13. For the use of the 
resolved form see iv. 12 n. Gaudium 
ductorum fit plenum cum multos pre- 
dicando ad sancte ecclesize societa- 
tem...perducunt (Bede). Comp. Phil. 
ii. 2. 

A. THe PropLeM or Lire AND 
THOSE TO WHOM IT IS PROPOSED (i. 5— 
ii. 17). 

1. 5—10o. Toe Natore or Gop 
AND THE CONSEQUENT RELATION OF 
MAN TO Gop. 


The section contains 1 the descrip- 
tion of the Being of God (v. 5); and 
then 2 the description of man’s rela- 
tion to God as thus made known (6— 
10), in answer to the three typical 
false pleas (i) of the indifference of 
moral action in regard to spiritual 
fellowship (6, 7); (ii) of the unreality 
of sinfulness as a permanent conse- 
quence of wrong action (8, 9); and (iii) 
of actual personal freedom from sin- 
ful deeds (10). These pleas are shewn 
to depend (1) on immediate denial of 
what is distinctly known (6); (2) on 
self-deception (8); and (3) on disre- 
gard of divine revelation (10). 


1. The Nature of God (i. 5). 


5. 5And this is the message which 
we hare heard from him and 


Comp. iii. 11; ii. 25. 


announce to you, that God is light, 
and in him is no darkness at all. 
The connexion of this verse with 
what precedes is not at once obvious. 
The declaration which it contains as 
to the nature of God is not, as 
far as we know, a direct repetition 
of any words of the Lord; nor is 
it clear at first sight how it gathers 
up what has been already said of 
‘the revelation of life’ as apprehended 
in apostolic experience. Fuller con- 
sideration appears to shew that the 
idea of spiritual fellowship furnishes 
the clue to the course of St John’s 
thought. Fellowship must repose 
upon mutual knowledge. If we have 
fellowship with God we must know 
truly what He is and what we are, 
and the latter knowledge flows from 
the former. The revelation of life 
from first to last is the progressive 
manifestation of God and the pro- 
gressive assimilation to God. The 
revelation through the Incarnation 
completes all that was revealed be- 
fore: Christ came ‘not to destroy but 
to fulfil’: and this revelation is briefly 
comprehended in the words ‘God is 
light,’ absolutely pure, glorious, self- 
communicating from His very nature. 
He imparts Himself, and man was 
made to receive Him; and, in spite of 
sin, mau can receive Him. Thus the 
fundamental ideas of Christianity lie 
in this announcement: ‘ God is light’; 
and man turns to the Light as 
being himself created in the image of 
God (Gen. i. 27; 1 Cor. xi. 7) and re- 
created in Christ (Eph. ii. 10; Col. 
iii. 10). This message is really ‘the 
Gospel.’ 

Hac sententia B. Johannes...divinze 
puritatis excellentiam monstrat quam 
nos quoque imitari jubemur dicente 


1. 5] 


λ 23 , con ed 
Kal ἀναγγελλομεν ὑμῖν, OTL 


ipso: Sancti estote guoniam ego sanc- 
tus Dominus Deus vester Lev. xix. 2 
(Bede). 

xai...] And... The declaration is the 
simple development of the statement 
in Ὁ. 3: ‘We declare unto you what 
we have seen and heard, in order to 
establish your fellowship with us, and 
to fulfil our joy. And this ds the 
message which has such divine power.’ 

ἔστιν αὕτη] this is the message. 
The original order (lost in V. et hee 
est) in which the substantive verb 
stands first with unusual emphasis (καὶ 
ἔστιν αὕτη, comp. Hebr. xi. 1 note), 
marks the absoluteness, the perma- 
nence, of the message. ‘The ‘is’ is 
not merely a copula, but predicates 
existence in itself. Comp. c. v. 16, 17; 
ii. 15 note; John v. 45, viii. 50, 54. 
The exact form of expression is unique. 
On the other hand see 6. ii. 25; iii. 11, 
23; V. 4, 9, 11, 14 and 2 John 6. 

ἀγγελία] adnuntiatio V., message. 
The word occurs only here and iii. 11 
in the N.T., and it is rare in the Lxx. 
The corresponding verb occurs in the 
N.T. only in John xx. 18. The simplest 
word appears to be chosen to describe 
the divine communication. The an- 
nouncement as to the nature of God 
is a personal revelation and not a 
discovery. God gives tidings of Him- 
self and so only can man know Him. 

ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ] from him, that is, the Son 
of the Father, Jesus Christ, in whom 
the life was manifested, and who has 
been the main subject of the pre- 
ceding verses. 

The ‘from’ (ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ) marks the 
ultimate and not necessarily the im- 
mediate source (παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ). The 
phrase ἀκούειν ἀπό is not found else- 
where in St John (but see Acts ix. 13) 
while ἀκούειν παρά is frequent: John 
i. 40; vi. 45; vii. 51; Vili. 26, 38, 40: 
xv. 15. The ‘message’ which the 
Apostle announces had been heard 
not only from the lips of Christ but 
in fact also from all those in whom 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


15 
6 θεὸς φῶς ἐστὶν καὶ σκοτία 
He had spoken in earlier times (1 Pet. 
i. 11). He was the source even where 
He was not the speaker. Comp. 1 
Cor. xi. 23 παρέλαβον ἀπό, and 6. ii. 27 
note. 
ἀναγγέλλομεν] adnuntiamus, V., we 
announce. The simple verb and its 
derivatives convey shades of meaning 
which cannot be preserved in a ver- 
sion. ᾿Αγγέλλειν simply ‘to bring 
tidings’ occurs only John xx. 18. ’Avay- 
γέλλειν to report, with the additional 
idea of bringing the tidings up to or 
back to the person receiving them. 
᾿Απαγγέλλειν to announce with a dis- 
tinct reference to the source or place 
Jrom which the message comes, Ka- 
rayyéAXe to proclaim with authority, 
as commissioned to spread the tidings 
throughout those who hear them. 
In ἀναγγέλλειν the recipient, in ἀπαγ- 
γέλλειν the origin, in καταγγέλλειν the 
relation of the bearer and hearer of 
the message, are respectively most 
prominent. (1) Thus dvayy. has in 
nine cases a personal pronoun (ὑμῖν, 
ἡμῖν) after it, and in the two remain- 
ing places where it occurs (Acts xv. 
4; xix. 18) the persons to whom 
the announcement is made are placed 
in clear prominence. The word is not 
found in the Synoptic Gospels (Mark 
y. 14, 19 false readings). For its 
meaning compare 1 Pet. i. 12 ἃ νῦν 
ἀνηγγέλη ὑμῖν, tidings which were lately 
brought as far as up to you. Acts xx. 
20, 27 τοῦ μὴ ἀναγγεῖλαι ὑμῖν, not to 
extend my declaration of the Gospel 
even to you; John xvi. 13, 14, 153 
Acts xv. 4; 2 Cor. vii. 7; Acts xiv. 
27. (2) The proper sense of dzayy., 
again, is seen clearly Matt. ii. 8 ἀπαγγ. 
μοι, from the place where you find the 
Christ, Mark xvi. 13 ἀπηγγ. Tots λοιποῖς, 
from Emmaus where the revelation 
was made; [John iv. 51 ἀπηγγ. λέ- 
yovres, from his house where the sick 
child lay;] 1 Cor. xiv. 25 drayy., from 
the assembly at which he was moved. 
The word is frequent in the Synoptic 


16 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Gospels and in the Acts; elsewhere, 
in addition to the places quoted, it 
occurs only 1 Thess. i. 9; 1 John 1. 
2,3. (Heb. 11. 12 Lxx.) Comp. Ὁ. 2 
note. (3) KarayyéAdew is found only 
in Acts (καταγγελεύς Acts xvii. 18) and 
St Paul. Its force appears Acts xvi. 
21 καταγγέλλουσιν ἔθη, ΧΥΪΙ. 3 ὃν ἐγὼ 
καταγγέλλω, &e. 

In connexion with these words it 
may be noticed that St John never 
uses in his Gospel or Epistles evay- 
γέλιον (or cognates). Cf. Apoc. xiv. 
6; χ. 7. 

ὅτι...ἐστὶν καί...οὐκ ἔστιν...1] The 
combination of the positive and nega- 
tive statements brings out (1) the 
idea of God’s nature, and (2) the perfect 
realisation of the idea: He is light 
essentially, and in fact He is perfect, 
unmixed, light. The form of the 
negative statement is remarkable: 
‘Darkness there is not in Him, no, 
not in any way.’ Οὐδείς is added si- 
milarly to a sentence already com- 
plete in John xix. 11 (vi. 63; xii. 19). 
The double negative is lost in the 
Latin: tenebre in co non sunt ulle. 

Positive and negative statements 
are combined vv. 6, 8; ii. 4, 27; v. 12; 
John i. 3, 5, 20; ii. 25; iii. 16 (20), 

ὁ θεὸς φῶς ἐστίν] Deus lux est, V., 
God is light. The statement is made 
absolutely as to the nature of God, 
and not directly as to His action: as 
to what He zs, and not as to what He 
does. It is not said that He is ‘a 
light,” as one out of many, through 
Whom or from Whom illumination 
comes; nor again, that He is ‘the 
light,” in relation to created beings. 
But it is said simply ‘He is light.’ 
The words are designed to give us 
some conception of His Being. Comp. 
Philo de Somn. i. p. 362 πρῶτος μὲν ὁ 
θεὸς φῶς ἐστί.. καὶ οὐ μόνον φῶς ἀλλὰ 
καὶ παντὸς ἑτέρου φωτὸς ἀρχέτυπον, 
μᾶλλον δὲ ἀρχετύπου πρεσβύτερον καὶ 
ἀνώτερον... 

Thus the phrase is at once distin- 
guished from the cognate phrases 
which are defined by some addition ; as 


[I. 5 


when creation, so far as it is a mani- 
festation of the life of the Word, that 
is, as Life, is spoken of as being ‘the 
light of men’ (John i. 4 f.): or when 
‘the light, the true light, which light- 
eth every man’ is spoken of as ‘com- 
ing into the world’ (John i. 9; comp. 
c. ii.8); or when Christ—the Incarnate 
Word—declares Himself to be ‘ the 
light of the world’ (John viii. 12; ix. 
5; comp. xii. 46); or ‘the light’ 
(John iii. 19 Εν, xii. 35 f.); or when 
Christians, as representing Christ, are 
also called by Him ‘the light of the 
world’ (Matt. v. 14). 

On the other hand it is closely 
parallel with two other phrases in St 
John’s writings with which it must 
be compared and combined: God is 
spirit (John iv. 24) and God is love 
(c. iv. 8, 16). 

To a certain degree this phrase 
unites the two others. It includes 
the thought of immateriality, which 
finds its most complete expression in 
the idea of ‘spirit, and that of ‘ diffu- 
siveness, which finds its most com- 
plete expression in the idea of ‘love. 
But to these thoughts it adds those 
of purity and glory, which find their 
most complete expression in relation 
to man as he is in the idea of ‘fire’ 
(Heb. xii. 29). 

In order to enter into the meaning 
of the revelation given in the words, 
it is necessary to take account both of 
the biblical application of the term 
‘light’ and of the thoughts which are 
naturally suggested by a consideration 
of the nature of light. 

In each region of being ‘light’ re- 
presents the noblest manifestation of 
that energy to which it is applied. 
Physically ‘light’ embodies the idea 
of splendour, glory: intellectually of 
truth: morally of holiness. 

Again: in virtue of light, life and 
action become possible. Light may 
exist close beside us and yet we our- 
selves be in darkness, wholly uncon- 
scious of its presence, unless some 
object intervene and itself become 


I. 5] 


visible by reflecting into our eyes that 
which we had not before seen. Comp. 
Philo de pram. et poen. ii. 415 6 θεὸς 
ἑαυτοῦ φέγγος ὧν de αὐτοῦ μόνου θεω- 
petra. See also Ps. xxxvi. 10. As 
light it cannot but propagate itself; 
and, as far as its own nature is con- 
cerned, propagate itself without bound. 
All that limits is darkness. 

It must not however be supposed 
that in speaking of God as ‘light’ St 
John is speaking metaphorically, as if 
earthly ‘light’ were the reality to 
which God is likened. On the con- 
trary according to his thought the 
earthly light, with all its associations, 
is but a reflection in the finite and 
sensible world of the heavenly light. 
Through the reflection we rise, accord- 
ing to our power, to the reality. 

This being so, the description of 
God as ‘light’ is fitted to bring before 
us the conception that He is in Him- 
self unapproachable, infinite, omni- 
present, unchangeable, the source of 
life, of safety, of the transfiguration 
of all things. 

And yet more than this the phrase 
has a direct bearing upon the eco- 
nomy of Redemption. It implies that 
God in Himself is absolutely holy ; 
and at the same time that it is His 
nature to impart Himself without 
limit. 

The first fact carries with it the 
condition of man’s fellowship with 
Him. The second fact suggests that 
He will make some provision for the 
redemption and atonement of man 
fallen, in accordance with the pur- 
pose of creation. 

The revelation of the Word, the 
Life, of ‘Jesus, the Son of God, ful- 
fils the condition and the hope. By 
this we apprehend in all fulness 
that God is light, self-communicating, 
making the darkness felt to be what 
it is, conquering the darkness, while 
He claims from man complete self- 
surrender to His influence. 

Here then as in every other place the 
revelation of the nature of God is not 


W. J. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 17 


a satisfaction of speculative question- 
ings: it is the groundwork of practical 
results. 

God is light: therefore men must 
walk in the light. 

God is spirit: therefore men must 
worship in spirit (John iv. 24). 

God is love: therefore the mani- 
festation of love is the sign of divine 
childship (iv. 7, 8, 16). 

Comp. Heb. xii. 29. 

See Additional Note on iv. 8. 

The general opposition of light and 
darkmess, which occurs throughout 
all Scripture, as throughout all litera- 
ture, in its manifold partial applica- 
tions, gives additional meaning to the 
phrase. 


Category of Category of 
Light. Darkness. 
truth falsehood. 
good evil. 
joy sorrow. 
safety peril. 
life death. 


Compare Matt. iv. 16; Luke i. 79; 
xi. 35 ἢ; John iii. 19, 20; 1 Pet. ii. 9; 
2 Cor. iv. 6; vi. 14; Ps. xxvii. 1 (and 
Hupfeld’s note). 

καὶ σκοτία...) The light which God 
is, is infinite, unbounded by any out- 
line, and absolutely pure. It follows 
that all that is in darkness, all that is 
darkness, is excluded from fellowship 
with God by His very nature. There 
is in Him nothing which has affinity 
to it. 

In speaking of ‘light’ and ‘dark- 
ness’ it is probable that St John had 
before him ‘the Zoroastrian specula- 
tions on the two opposing spiritual 
powers which influenced Christian 
thought at avery early date. Comp. 
Basilides, fragm. Quidam enim [bar- 
barorum] dixerunt initia omnium duo. 
esse quibus bona et mala associaverunt, 
ipsa dicentes initia sine initio esse et 
ingenita: id est, in principiis lucem 
fuisse ac tenebras, que ex semetipsis 
essent non que esse dicebantur (ap. 
Iren. Stieren, i. p. 901). 


2 


18 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


2 at 2 ? toe ἔν , 
οὐκ εστιν EV αὐτῷ οὐδεμία. 


οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ Β me the: ἐν αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔστιν S NAC vg. 


2. The relation of men to God (i. 
6—10). 


The revelation of what God is de- 
termines man’s relation to Him; for 
it ig assumed that man knows (or can 
know) what he himself is in himself. 
The declaration of the majesty of 
God therefore raises the question of 
the possibility of man’s fellowship 
with Him; of the possibility, that is, 
of the fulfilment of the Apostle’s pur- 
pose (v. 3). How can the message 
“God is light’ issue in our com- 
munion with the Father and with 
His Son Jesus Christ? The answer 
lies, as we have seen, in the fact that 
it is of the essence of light-nature to 
communicate itself. The true sense 
of what God is takes us out of our- 
selves. He gives Himself: we must 
welcome Him; and so reflecting His 
glory we become like Him (2 Cor. iii. 
18; 1 John iii. 2). 

But this ‘assimilation to God’ 
(ὁμοίωσις τῷ θεῷ κατὰ τὸ δυνατόν) re- 
quires a frank recognition of what 
we are. St John therefore considers 
the three false views which man is 
tempted to take of his position. He 
may deny the reality of sin (6, 7), or 
his responsibility for sin (8, 9), or 
the fact of sin in his own case (10). 
By doing this he makes fellowship 
with God, as He has been made 
known, impossible for himself. On 
the other hand, God has made pro- 
vision for the realisation of fellowship 
between Himself and man in spite of 
sin. 

The contrasts and consequences 
involved in this view of man’s relation 
to God can be placed clearly in a 
symmetrical form (vv. 6, 8, 10): 
°Tf we say We have fellowship with 

Him, and walk in the darkness, 

we lie, and 
we do not the truth. 


[I. 6 


᾽ » e/ 
σ᾽ Εὰν εἴπωμεν OTe 
6. ἐὰν --άρ A. 


876 we say We have no sin, 
we deceive ourselves and 
the truth is not in us. 
Tf we say We have not sinned, 
we make Him a liar and 
His word is not in us. 
On the other hand (ve. 7, 9): 
But if we walk in the light, as He ἐξ 
in the light, 
we have fellowship one 
with another, and 
the blood of Jesus His 
Son cleanseth us from 
all sin. 
9 17 we confess our sins, 

He is faithful and right- 
cous to forgive us our 
sins, and 

to cleanse us from all 
unrighteousness. 


The third contrast passes into a 
different form (ii. 1 f.). 

The whole description refers to the 
general character and tendency of 
life, and not to the absolute fulfilment 
of the character in detail. 

The progress in the development 
of the thought is obvious from the 
parallelisms. ‘ We lie, ‘we deceive 
ourselves, ‘we make Him a liar’: we 
are false, that is, to our own know- 
ledge; we persuade ourselves that 
falsehood is truth; we dare to set our- 
selves above God. And again: ‘ze 
do not the truth, ‘the truth ts not 
in us, ‘His word ts not in us’: we 
do not carry into act that which we 
have recognised as our ruling prin- 
ciple; the Truth, to which conscience 
bears witness, is not the spring and 
law of our life; we have broken off 
our vital connexion with the Truth 
when it comes to us as ‘the Word of 
God’ with a present, personal force. 

Corresponding to this growth of 
falsehood we have a view of the 
general character of the Christian 


1. 6] 


/ 
Kowwviay 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 19 


Yi “ A - , 
ἔχομεν MET αὐτοῦ Kal ἐν τῷ σκότει περι- 


- ΄ = \ > 
πατώμεν, ψευδόμεθα καὶ οὐ ποιοῦμεν τὴν ἀλήθειαν. 


life, a life of spiritual fellowship and 
sanctification ; and then of its detailed 
realisation in spite of partial failures. 

6. ἐὰν εἴπωμεν͵] St John con- 
siders only the case of professing 
Christians. In doing this he unites 
himself with those whom he ad- 
dresses; and recognises the fact that 
he no less than his fellow-Christians 
has to guard against the temptations 
to which the three types of false doc- 
trine correspond. 

The exact form of expression (ἐὰν 
εἴπωμεν) is found only in this passage 
(vv, 6, 8, 10; comp. iv. 20 ἐάν τις εἴπῃ). 
It contemplates a direct assertion of 
the several statements, and not simply 
the mental conception of them. 

ὅτῇ The particle here and in oz. 
8, 10 seems to be recitative. Comp. 
ii, 4; iv. 20; John i. 20, 32; iv. 17, 
25; vi. 14; Vii. 12; ix. 9, 23, 41. 

cow. ἔχομεν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ] with Him, 
i.e. with God (the Father), the sub- 
ject which immediately precedes. 

The statement is the simple asser- 
tion of the enjoyment of the privileges 
of the Christian faith, Ὁ. 3, note: “If 
we claim to have reached the end of 
Christian effort...” 

καὶ ἐν τῷ ox. περι] The compati- 
bility of indifference to moral action 
with the possession of true faith has 
been maintained by enthusiasts in all 
times of religious excitement. Comp. 
ὁ. ii. 43 ii. 6; 3 John 11. 

For early forms of the false teach- 
ing see Iren. 1. 6, 2; Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iii. 4 §§ 31 f.; 5 § 40. Comp. 
Jude 2. 4. 

ἐν τῷ ox. wep.) walk in the dark- 
ness, choose and use the darkness 
as our sphere of action. The ques- 
tion is not directly of the specific 
character of special acts, but of the 
whole region of life outward and in- 
ward. The darkness (τὸ σκότος) is 
the absolute opposite of ‘the light.’ 


To choose this as our sphere of move- 
ment is necessarily to shun fellowship 
with God. Part of the thought in- 
cluded in ‘ walking in darkness’ may 
be expressed by saying that we seek 
to hide part of our lives from our- 
selves, from our neighbour, from God. 
Comp. John iii. 20. 

For the phrase see Is. ix. 2; John 
viii. 12 (ἐν τῇ σκοτίᾳ). Comp. Matt. iv. 
16; Luke i. 79; Rom. ii. 19. Σκότος 
occurs in St John only here and John 
iii. 19 note. 

The image of ‘walking, resting on 
the Old Testament aba, LXX. περιπα- 
τεῖν, is not found applied to conduct 
in classical writers, but is common in 
St John and St Paul. The word is 
not found in this sense in St James 
or St Peter, and in the Synoptic 
group of writings only in Mark vii. 5; 
Acts xxi. 21. St John, it may be 
added, does not use ἀναστροφή, ava- 
στρέφεσθαι, which are common in St 
Peter and occur in St Paul and St 
James; nor πορεύεσθαι, which is found 
in St Luke (Gosp. Acts), St Peter (1, 
2), and St Jude. Such ‘walking’ is 
not to be limited to mere outward 
conduct, but covers the whole activity 
of life. 

ψευδόμεθα...οὐ ποιοῦμεν... The com- 
bination of the positive and negative 
expressions here again (0. 5) presents 
the two sides of the thought. Men 
who profess to combine fellowship 
with God with the choice of darkness 
as their sphere of life, actively affirm 
what they know to be false; and on 
the other hand, they neglect to carry 
out in deed what they claim to hold. 
The two clauses (lie...do) correspond 
with the two which precede (say... 
walk). 

ψευδόμεθα] The assertion is not 
only false in fact, but known to be 
false: it-is at variance with man’s 
nature. Comp. James iii. 14. 


2----2 


20 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[1.7 


72. & 4 - ‘ - € > No , - 
€av δὲ εν τω φωτι περιίπάτωμεν WS AUTOS ἐστιν EV TWH 


οὐ ποιοῦμεν τὴν ἀλήθειαν) non faci- 
mus veritatem V., we do not the truth 
(syr vg gives do not advance in...). 
Truth is not only in thought and 
word, but also in action. ‘The Truth’ 
(ἡ ἀλήθεια) which reaches to every 
part of human nature—the sum of all 
that ‘is’—must find expression in a 
form answering to the whole man. 
‘I act, in the words of Whichcote, 
‘and therefore I am.’ Comp. John 
111. 21 note; Neh. ix. 33 (LXx.). 

In the Old Testament the phrase 
‘to do mercy and truth’ (Lxx.) occurs 
not unfrequently: Gen. xlvii. 29; 
Josh. ii. 14; 2 Sam. ii. 6; xv. 20, &e. 
Contrast ποιεῖν ψεῦδος, Apoc. χα]. 27. 

7. ‘Walking in the darkness’ is 
fatal to fellowship with God, but such 
fellowship is still possible. The Chris- 
tian can in his measure imitate God 
(Eph. v. 1); and as he does so, he 
realises fellowship with the brethren, 
which is the visible sign of fellow- 
ship with God. At the same time 
Christ’s Blood cleanseth him con- 
stantly, and little by little, from all 
sin. The chosen rule of life—the 
‘walking in light’—is more and more 
perfectly embodied in deed. The 
failure which is revealed in the pre- 
sence of God is removed. 

God zs in the light absolutely and 
unalterably: man moves in the light 
from stage to stage as he advances to 
the fulness of his growth; and under 
the action of the light he is himself 
transfigured, 

The process of this great change 
is written significantly in the N. T. 
Christ by resurrection from the dead 
first proclaimed light (Acts xxvi. 23), 
that is life reflecting the divine glory ; 
to this God has called us (1 Pet. ii. 9); 
and opened our eyes to look on the 
illumination of the gospel of the glory 
of Christ who ts the image of God (2 
Cor. iv. 4); who made us meet to be 
partakers of the inheritance of the 


saints in the light (Col. i. 12). By 
believing on the light we become sons 
of light (John xii. 36: comp. Luke xvi. 
8; 1 Thess. v. 5); and finally are our- 
selves light in the Lord (Eph. v. 8). 

‘Walking in the light’ brings two 
main results in regard to our relation 
to men and to God. We realise fel- 
lowship one with another, and in the 
vision of God’s holiness we become 
conscious of our own sin. That fel- 
lowship is the pledge of a divine fel- 
lowship: that consciousness calls out 
the application of the virtue of Christ’s 
life given for us and to us. 

ἐὰν Sé...] but if we walk... There 
is a sharp contrast between the vain 
profession of fellowship and godlike 
action. But, setting aside mere words, 
uf we walk in the light... 

ev τῷ φ. περιπ.] The one absolute 
light is opposed to the darkness. To 
choose the light as the sphere of life 
is to live and move as in the revealed 
presence of God. Comp. Is. ii. 5; li. 4. 

The thought of walking in light and 
in darkness soon found expression in 
the allegory of ‘The two ways.’ Barn. 
Ep. xviii. ff. Doctrine of the Apostles, 
I—6. 

ὡς αὐτός... sicut et ipse Latt., as 
He Himself is in the light. God is 
light, and He is in the light. Being 
light He radiates (as it were) His 
glory and dwells in this light unap- 
proachable (1 Tim. vi. 16). The realm 
of perfect truth and purity in which 
He is completely corresponds to His 
own nature. Under another aspect 
light is His garment (Ps. civ. 2), 
which at once veils and reveals His 
Majesty. 

Bede expresses well the contrast of 
περιπατεῖν and εἶναι: Notanda dis- 
tinctio verborum... Ambulant...justi 
in luce cum virtutum operibus servi- 
entes ad meliora proficiunt... Deus 
autem sine aliquo profectu semper 
bonus, justus, verusque existit. 


1.7] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 21 


, ἢ at ? ? c \ ‘ ec 
φωτί, κοινωνίαν ἔχομεν μετ’ ἀλλήλων Kal TO αἷμα 


Og ae δ ᾿ 
᾿Ιησοῦ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ καθαρίζει ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ πάσης ἁμαρ- 


7: Her’ ἀλλήλων: A* (appy) tol ΟἹ ΑΙ Tert (followed by J. C. domini nostri) 


read per’ αὐτοῦ; harl has cum deo. 
glosses. 


The readings are evidently interpretative 


Ἰησοῦ NBC syrr the: + χριστοῦ ς᾽ A vg me. 
καθαρίζει : some auths., including A, read the future (καθαρίσει or καθαριεῖ). 


αὐτός} He Himself, our Lord and 
King. Comp. Deut. xxxii. 39; Is. 
xli. 4 (Cheyne); xliii. 10; Jer. v. 12; 
Ps, cii. 28 (8477). 

κοιν. ἔχ. per’ ἀλλ. societatem ha- 
bemus ad invicem V., we have fellow- 
ship one with another, that is, brother 
with brother : we enjoy the fulness of 
Christian communion. The transcen- 
dental fellowship with God which the 
false Christian claimed becomes for us 
a practical fellowship in actual life. 
True fellowship with God comes 
through men. Love of the brethren is 
the proof of the love of God: fellow- 
ship with the brethren is the proof of 
fellowship with God. 

St John does not repeat the phrase 
which he has quoted from the vain 
professors of Christianity (we have 
JSellowship with Him, v. 6), but gives 
that which is its true equivalent ac- 
cording to the conditions of our being. 
Comp. σ. 3. 

The supposition that per ἀλλήλων 
means ‘we with God and God with 
us’ is against the apostolic form of 
language (John xx. 17), and also a- 
gainst the genera form of St John’s 
argument, for he takes the fellowship 
of Christians as the visible sign and 
correlative of fellowship with God : 
iv. 7,12. Comp. iii. 11, 23. 

kal τὸ αἷμα... and the blood... 
This clause is coordinate with that 
which goes before. The two results 
of ‘walking in the light’ are inti- 
mately bound together. Active fel- 
lowship shews the reality of that 
larger spiritual life, which is life in 
God; and at the same time the action 
of Christ upon the members of His 


Body brings about that real sinlessness 
which is essential to union with God. 

The case taken is that of those who 
are in Christ’s Body. The question 
is not of ‘justification,’ but of ‘ sancti- 
fication.” ‘Walking in the light’ is 
presupposed, as the condition for this 
application of the virtue of Christ’s 
Life and Death. See Additional Note. 

Ἰησοῦ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ] Jesus His 
Son. The union of the two natures 
in the one Person is clearly marked 
by the contrast ‘Jesus’ (not Jesus 
Christ), ‘ His Son.” Compare (iv. 15); 
v. 5; Heb. iv 14; (Gal. iv. 4 ff); 
and for the full title δ. 3 note. Here 
the human name (Jesus) brings out the 
possibility of the communication of 
Christ’s Blood ; and the divine name 
brings out its all-sufficing efficacy. 

Mire...ait e¢ sanguis Jesu filit 
ejus : Filius quippe Dei in divinitatis 
natura sanguinem habere non potuit; 
sed quia idem Filius Dei etiam Filius 
hominis factus est recte propter uni- 
tatem persone ejus Filii Dei sangui- 
nem appellat ut verum eum corpus 
assumpsisse, verum pro nobis san- 
guinem fudisse demonstraret (Bede). 
So Ignatius (ad Eph. 1) ventures to 
write ἐν αἵματι θεοῦ. Comp. Light- 
foot on Clem. Rom. i. 2 παθήματα 
αὐτοῦ, and the Additional Note in the 
Appendix, pp. 400 ff. 

For the title see Additional Note 
on iii. 23. 

καθαρίζει) emundat V., purgabit 
Aug., cleanseth. Comp. John xiii. 10. 
The thought is not of the forgiveness 
of sin only, but of the removal of βίη. 
The sin is done away; and the puri- 
fying action is exerted continuously. 


22 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[1.8 


Sf , af € A 
vias. *°'Eav εἴπωμεν ὅτι ᾿λμαρτίαν οὐκ ἔχομεν, EavTOUS 


The idea of ‘cleansing’ is specially 
connected with the fitting preparation 
for divine service and divine fellow- 
ship. Ritual ‘cleanness’ was the 
condition for the participation in the 
privileges of approach to God, under 
the Old Covenant. So ‘the blood of 
Christ’ cleanses the conscience for 
service to Him Who is a Living God 
(Heb. ix. 13f, 22 f.). Hegave Him- 
self for us, to cleanse for Himself 
a peculiar people (Tit. ii. 14). He 
cleansed the Church to present it to 
Himself in glory (Eph. v. 26 f.). 

The fulness of the thought is ex- 
pressed in Matt. v. 8, where the bless- 
ing of ‘the clean (καθαροί) in heart’ 
is that they shall see God (comp. 1 
John iii, 2), 

a. πάσης ἀμ from all sin, so that 
men are made like to God, in Whom 
is no darkness (v. 5). The thought 
here is of ‘sin’ and not of ‘sins’: 
of the spring, the principle, and not 
of the separate manifestations. For 
the singular compare c. iii. 8 f.; John 
i. 29: for the plural τ. 9; ii. 2, 12; 
iv. 10; Apoc. i. 5. 

The sing. and plur. are used in sig- 
nificant connexion, John viii. 21, 24. 

For the use of πᾶς with abstract 
nouns (7. ἀμ. ‘sin in all its many 
forms’) see James i. 2 πᾶσα χαρά, 2 
Cor. xii. 12 πᾶσα ὑπομονή, Eph. i. 8 
πᾶσα copia, 2 Pet. i. 5 πᾶσα σπουδή. 
Contrast 1 Pet. v. 7 πᾶσα ἡ μέριμνα, 
John v. 22 (τὴν κρίσιν πᾶσαν), Xvi. 13 
(τὴν ἀλήθειαν πᾶσαν). 

The apostle describes the end and 
consummation of Christ’s work, to- 
wards which the believer is ever 
moving. There is no promise that 
the end will be reached on earth. 

8. The mention of sin at the end 
of v. 7 leads on to a new tLought and 
a new plea. ‘How,’ it may be asked, 
‘has the Christian anything more to 
do with sin? How does it still con- 
tinue?’ The question hasreal difficulty. 


Some who do not venture to affirm 
the practical indifference of action, 
may yet maintain that sin does not 
cleave to him who has committed it, 
that man is not truly responsible for 
the final consequences of his conduct. 
This is the second false plea: We have 
no sin; sin isa transient phenomenon 
which leaves behind no abiding issues: 
it is an accident and not a principle 
within us. 

The issue of this second false plea 
is also presented in a positive and 
negative form. By affirming our prac- 
tical irresponsibility ‘we lead our- 
selves astray’ positively, and nega- 
tively we shew that ‘the truth is not 
in us’ as an informing, inspiring 
power. 

ἅμ. οὐκ ἔχομεν] we have no sin. 
The phrase ἁμαρτίαν ἔχειν is peculiar 
to St John in the N. T. Like corre- 
sponding phrases ἔχειν πίστιν (Matt. 
xvii. 20; xxi. 21, &c.), ζωὴν ἔχειν (John 
v. 26, 40, &c.), λύπην ἔχειν (John xvi. 
21 f.), &c., it marks the presence of 
something which is not isolated but a 
continuous source of influence (comp. 
κοινωνίαν ἔχειν Ὁ. 3). 

Thus ‘to have sin’ is distinguished 
from ‘to sin’ as the sinful principle is 
distinguished from the sinful act in 
itself. ‘To have sin’ includes the 
idea of personal guilt: it describes a 
state both as a consequence and as a 
cause. 

Comp. John ix. 41; xv. 22, note, 
24; xix. 11. 

The word ‘sin’ is to be taken quite 
generally and not confined to original 
sin, or to sin of any particular type. 
A tempting form of this kind of error 
finds expression in a fragment of 
Clement of Alexandria (Eel. Proph. 
§ 15, p. 993 P.) ὁ μὲν πιστεύσας ἄφεσιν 
ἁμαρτημάτων ἔλαβεν παρὰ τοῦ κυρίου, 
ὁ δ' ἐν γνώσει γενόμενος ἅτε μηκέτι 
ἁμαρτάνων παρ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ τὴν ἄφεσιν τῶν 
λοιπῶν κομίζεται. 


I. 9] 


“ ε > f > at com 
πλανώμεν καὶ ἡ ἀλήθεια οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν ἡμῖν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 23 


92 \ « 
εαν ομο- 


lad \ , “ 
λογώμεν τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶν, πιστός ἐστιν καὶ δίκαιος 


8. οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν ἡμῖν NB me the: ἐν ἡμῖν οὐκ ἔστιν S AC vg. Comp. v. το. 


ἑαυτοὺς πλαν.] ipsi nos seducimus 
V., we deceive ourselves, or rather, 
we lead ourselves astray. Our fatal 
error is not only a fact (πλανώμεθα 
Matt. xxii. 29; John vii. 47), but it is 
a fact of which we are the responsible 
authors. The result is due to our 
own efforts. We know that the asser- 
tion which we make is false (ψευδό- 
μεθα); and, more than this, we per- 
suade ourselves that it is true. 

The phrase does not occur again in 
N. T. For the use of ἑαυτούς with 
the first person see Acts xxiii. 14; 
Rom. viii. 23; xv. 1; 1 Cor. xi. 31; 
2 Cor. i. 9, &c. St John uses it with 
the second person 6. v. 21; 2 John 8; 
John v. 42; vi. 53; xii. 8. 

The idea of πλάνη (c. iv. 6) is in all 
cases that of straying from the one 
way (James v. 19 f.): not of miscon- 
ception in itself, but of misconduct. 
Such going astray is essentially ruin- 
ous. 

The cognate terms are used of 
the false christs and prophets (Matt. 
xxiv. 4 ff.; Apoc. ii. 20; xiii. 14; xix. 
20; comp. 6. iv. 6; 2 Ep. 7); of 
Satan (Apoc. xii. 9; xx. 3 ff), of 
Babylon (Apoc. xviii. 23), of Balaam 
(Jude 11). 

᾿Απατάω, ἀπάτη (φρεναπατάω, ppeva- 
marys) are not found in the writings 
of St John. In this group of words 
the primary idea is that of ‘decep- 
tion, the conveying to another a false 
belief. 

καὶ ἡ GA. οὐκ ἔ. ἐν ἡμ.] and the truth 
ts not in us. According to the true 
reading the pronoun is unemphatic 
(so τ. το). The thought of ‘the Truth’ 
prevails over that of the persons. In 
St John ‘the Truth’ is the whole 
Gospel as that which meets the re- 
quirements of man’s nature. Comp. 
John viii. 32 ff; xviii. 37. Introd. 
to Gospel of St John, p. xliv. 


The same conception is found in 
the other apostolic writings; 2 Thess. 
ii, 12; Rom. ii. 8; 2 Cor. xiii. 8; 
(Gal. v. 7); 1 Tim. iii. 15; iv. 3; vis; 
2 Tim. ii. 15, 18; (Tit. i. 1); Heb. x. 
26; 1 Pet. i. 22; James iii. 14; v. 19. 

The Truth may therefore in this 
most comprehensive sense be regarded 
without us or within us: as some- 
thing outwardly realised (v. 6 do the 
truth), or as something inwardly effi- 
cacious (the truth isin us). Comp. Ὁ. 
1onote. With this specific statement 
ἡ GX. οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν ἡμῖν (comp. ii. 4) con- 
trast the general statement οὐκ ἔστιν 
ἀλ. ἐν αὐτῷ John viii. 44 (‘there is no 
truth in him’). ᾿ 

9. How then, it may be asked, can 
consequences be done away? If sin 
is something which clings to us in this 
way, how can it be ‘effaced’? The 
answer is that the same attributes of 
God which lead to the punishment of 
the unrepentant lead to the forgive- 
ness and cleansing of the penitent. He 
meets frank confession with free bless- 
ing. And the divine blessing con- 
nected with the confession of sins is 
twofold. It includes (1) the remission 
of sins, the remission of the con- 
sequences which they entail, and (2) 
the cleansing of the sinner from the 
moral imperfection which separates 
him from God: 1 Cor. vi. 9; Luke 
xiii. 27. 

ἐὰν 6pod.] There is no sharp oppo- 
sition in form between this verse and 
Ὁ. 8, as there is between 7 and 6 (if 
we say—but if (ἐὰν δέ) we walk). Open 
confession and open assertion are acts 
of the same order. 

Gpor. τὰς ap.] confess our sins, not 
only acknowledge them, but acknow- 
ledge them openly in the face of men. 
Comp. ii. 23; iv. 2, 3,15; Apoc. iii. 5; 
John i. 20; ix. 22; xii. 42; Rom. x. 9, 
ὅτ. The exact phrase is not found else- 


24 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


{I.9 


ἵ ibn ἡμῖν τὰς ἁμαρτίας καὶ καθαρίση ἡμᾶς ἄπὸ 
ἵνα ady ἡμῖν Tas aap pion ne 


9. Tas du. (2) AB: - ἡμῶν NC vg syrr the me. 


where in N.T.; but the kindred phrase 
ἐξομολογεῖσθαι ἁμαρτίας (παραπτώματα) 
occurs Matt. iii. 6 || ΜῈ i. 5; James 
y. 16. Comp. Acts xix. 18. 

Comp. Ecclus. iv. 26 μὴ αἰσχυνθῇς 
ὁμολογῆσαι ἐφ᾽ ἁμαρτίαις σου, Sus. Ὁ. 
14 ὡμολόγησαν τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν. 

Nothing is said or implied as to the 
mode in which such confession is to 
be made. That is to be determined 
by experience. Yet its essential cha- 
racter is made clear. It extends to 
specific, definite acts, and not only to 
sin in general terms. That which 
corresponds to saying ‘we have no 
sin’ is not saying ‘we have sin,’ but 
‘confessing our sins.’ The denial is 
made in an abstract form: the con- 
fession is concrete and personal. 

Augustine says with touching force: 
Ista levia quee dicimus noli contem- 
nere. Si contemnis quando appen- 
dis, expavesce quando numeras. And 
again: Vis ut ille ignoscat? tu ag- 
nosce. 

πιστός ἐστιν...1 The subject (God) 
is necessarily supplied from the con- 
text, vv. 5 ff. The form of the sen- 
tence (πιστός.. «ἵνα) presents the issue 
as that which is, in some sense, con- 
templated in the divine character. 
Forgiveness and cleansing are ends to 
which God, being what He is, has 
regard. He is not, as men are, fickle 
or arbitrary. On the contrary, He is 
essentially ‘faithful’ and ‘righteous,’ 
Comp. 1 Clem. ad Cor. c. 27. 

Ἵνα is construed with adjectives in 
other cases: John i. 27 ἄξιος ἵνα...; 
Luke vii. 6 ἱκανὸς iva..., but these are 
not strictly parallel; see c. iii, 11 
note. 

The epithet ‘faithful’ (πιστός) is 
applied to God not unfrequently in 
the Pauline epistles as being One who 
will fulfil His promises (Heb. x. 23; 
xi. 11), and complete what He has 
begun (1 Thess. v. 24; 1 Cor. i. 9), 


om. ἡμᾶς C. 


and guard those who trust in Him 
(1 Cor. x. 13; comp. 1 Pet. iv. 19), 
because this is His Nature (2 Tim. ii, 
13). With these passages those also 
must be compared in which Christ is 
spoken of as ‘faithful’ (2 Thess. iii. 3), 
and that both in regard to God (Heb. 
iii. 2) and to man (Heb. ii. 17). 

God (the Father) again is spoken 
of in the New Testament as ‘right- 
eous’ (δίκαιος) in Apoc. xvi. 5; John 
xvii. 25; Rom. iii. 26; and so also 
Christ, ο. ii. 1, iii. 7; 1 Pet, 111. 18 
(the usage in Matt. xxvii. 19, 24; 
Luke xsiii. 47 is different). The sub- 
ject in c. ii. 29 is doubtful. 

The essence of righteousness lies in 
the recognition and fulfilment of what 
is due from one to another. Truth 
passing into action is righteousness. 
He is said to be righteous who decides 
rightly, and he also who passes suc- 
cessfully through a trial. 

Righteousness is completely ful- 
filled in God both in respect of what 
He does and of what He is. Here 
action and character (as we speak) 
absolutely coincide. And yet further, 
the ‘righteousness’ of God answers 
to His revealed purpose of love; so 
that the idea of righteousness in this 
case draws near not unfrequently to 
the idea of ‘mercy’ Compare the 
use of ‘righteousness’ in the second 
part of Isaiah (eg. xlii. 6, Cheyne). 

It may indeed be said most truly 
that the righteousness of God is His 
love seen in relation to the discipline 
of man; and that love is righteousness 
seen in relation to the purpose of 
God. 

So far as righteousness is mani- 
fested in the life of one whose powers 
and circumstances change, the prin- 
ciple, which is unchanging, will receive 
manifold relative embodiments from 
time to time. 

The forgiveness and the cleansing 


I. 10] 


νὰ 3 , 
TAaAGHS ἀδικίας. 


of those who ‘confess their sins’ are 
naturally connected with God’s faith- 
fulness and righteousness. They an- 
swer to what He has been pleased 
to make known to us of His being 
in Scripture and life and_ history. 
He has laid down conditions for fel- 
lowship with Himself which man can 
satisfy and which He will satisfy. 

It is not difficult to see how this 
view of God’s action is included in 
the fundamental message: God is 
light. Light necessarily imparts it- 
self (πιστός), and imparts itself as 
light (δίκαιος). 

The two epithets are applied to 
God as ‘a righteous and faithful wit- 
ness,’ Jer. xlii. 5. 

ἀφῇ ἡμῖν τὰς ἀμ.) The verb ἀφιέναι 
occurs in this connexion in St John 
6. ii, 12; John xx. 23. The phrase 
ἄφεσις ἁμαρτιῶν (Synn., Acts, Eph., 
Col., Heb.) is not found in his writings. 
The image of ‘remission,’ ‘forgive- 
ness,’ presents sin as a ‘debt,’ some- 
thing external to the man himself in 
its consequences, just as the image of 
‘cleansing’ marks the personal stain. 

The repetition of the pronoun (ἡμῖν, 
ἡμᾶς) is to be noticed. 

ἀφῇ...-καθαρίσῃ] remittat...emundet 
ab... V., dimittat...purget ex... Aug. 
Sorgive...cleanse... Both acts are 
here spoken of in their completeness. 
The specific sins (ai ἁμαρτίαι) are 
forgiven (see Additional Note): the 
character (ἀδικία) is purified. The 
Christian character (righteousness) de- 
pends on a distinct relation to God in 
Christ. This admits of no degree; 
but there is a progressive hallowing 
of the Christian which follows after 
to the end of life (2. 7). 

The two parts of the divine action 
answer to the two aspects of right- 
eousness already noticed. As judg- 
ing righteously God forgives those 
who stand in a just relation to Him- 
self: as being righteous He commu- 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 25 


? \ of « > © 
"Ἐὰν εἴπωμεν ὅτι Οὐχ ἡμαρτήκαμεν, 


nicates His nature to those who are 
united with Him in His Son. 

Hence it is said that ‘God cleanses’ 
—there can be no doubt as to the 
subject—as before that ‘the blood of 
Christ cleanses.’ The Father, the one 
Fountain of Godhead, cleanses by 
applying the blood of the Son to 
believers. It is significant also that 
‘sin’ (as distinguished from ‘sins’) 
is here regarded under the relative 
aspect of duty as ‘unrighteousness’ 
(c. v. 17). 

ἀδικίας] iniquitate V., unrighteous- 
ness. The word occurs elsewhere in 
St John only in c. v.17; John vii. 18. 

Generally the kindred words (δικαι- 
οσύνη, &c.) are rare in his writings. 
Righteousness and unrighteousness 
are regarded by him characteristically 
under the aspect of truth and false- 
hood: that is, under the form of being 
rather than under the form of mani- 
festation. 

The correspondence of righteous 
and unrighteousness is lost in the 
Latin (justus...inigwitate), and hence 
in A.V. 

10. So far the Apostle has dealt 
with the two main aspects of the 
revelation God is light. He has 
shewn what is the character which it 
fixes for the man who is to have fel- 
lowship with Him (if we walk in the 
light); and he has shewn also how 
that character can be obtained (if we 
confess our sins). Man must become 
like God; and to this end he must re- 
cognise his natural unlikeness to Him. 

A third plea still remains. He who 
recognises the true character of sin, 
and the natural permanence of sin as 
a power within, may yet deny that 
he personally has sinned. This plea 
is suggested by the words ‘our sins’ 
in Ὁ. 9, just as the plea in v. 8 was 
suggested by ‘all sin’ in 7. 7. Con- 
viction in this case is sought not 
primarily in consciousness (we lie, v. 6; 


26 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[I. τὸ 


~ \ εν baa ᾿ a 
ψεύστην ποιοῦμεν αὐτὸν καὶ 6 λόγος αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἔστιν 


> € - 
ἐν ἡμῖν. 


we deceive ourselves, v. 8), but in the 
voice of God (we make Him a liar). 

The consequences of this assertion 
of sinlessness are stated in the same 
form as before (vv. 6, 8). By making 
it we affirm (positively) that God 
deals falsely with men; and (negative- 
ly) we are without the voice of God 
within us which converts His revela- 
tion for each one into a living Word. 

Thus divine revelation is regarded 
first from without and then from 
within. God speaks; and (it is im- 
plied) His word enters into the soul 
of the believer, and becomes in him a 
spring of truth (John iv. 14) and a 
power of life (6. ii. 14). By claiming 
sinlessness we first deny generally 
the truth of the revelation of God; 
and, as a consequence of this denial, 
we lose the privilege of ‘converse’ 
with Him: His word is not in us. 

Philo in an interesting passage 
(Leg. Alleg. i. 13: i. p. 50 M:) notices 
the grounds on which men seek to 
escape the charge of sin: ὁ μὴ ép- 
πνευσθεὶς (Gen. ii. 7) τὴν ἀληθινὴν 
ζωὴν ἀλλ᾽ ἄπειρος ὧν ἀρετῆς κολαζό- 
μενος ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἥμαρτεν εἶπεν ἂν ὡς ἀδίκως 
κολάζεται, ἀπειρίᾳ γὰρ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ σφάλ- 
λεσθαι περὶ αὐτό... τάχα δὲ μηδ᾽ ἁμαρ- 
τάνειν φήσει τὸ παράπαν εἴ γε τὰ ἀκούσια 
καὶ τὰ κατὰ ἄγνοιαν οὐδὲ ἀδικημάτων 
λόγον ἔχειν φασί τινες. 

οὐχ ἡμαρτήκαμεν)γ we have notsinned. 
The statement is quite unlimited. It 
is an absolute denial of the fact of 
past sin as carrying with it present 
consequences. 

Ψ. ποιοῦμεν αὐτόν] mendacem faci- 
mus eum V., we make Him a liar, 
that is God (the Father) who is the 
main subject of the whole section 
6—10 (with Him, v.6; as He is, 0.7; 
He is faithful, Ὁ. 9). The conclusion 
follows from a consideration of the 
nature of divine revelation. Reve- 
lation is directed in the first instance 


to making clear the position of man 
towards God. Such an office St Paul 
assigns to law, and to the Law par- 
ticularly. And generally all the com- 
munications of God to men presup- 
pose that the normal relations be- 
tween earth and heaven have been 
interrupted. To deny this is not only 
to question God’s truth in one par- 
ticular point, but to question it al- 


‘together; to say not only ‘He lieth’ 


in the specific declaration, but ‘ He is 
a liar’ in His whole dealing with 
mankind. Comp. c. y. Io. 

The peculiar phrase y. ποιοῦμεν is 
characteristic of St John (John v. 18; 
viii. 53; X. 33; xix. 7, 12), and carries 
with it the idea of overweening, un- 
righteous self-assertion. 

ὁ λόγος αὐτοῦ] His word, the word 
of God, ii. 14. Comp. John viii. 55; 
X. 35; Xvii. 6, 14, 17. 

The phrase is used specially for the 
Gospel message, which is the crown of 
all revelation: Luke v. 1; viii. 11, 21; 
xi. 28; and habitually in the Acts: 
iv. 31; vi. 2, 7; viii. 14; xi. 1; xii. 
24; mii. 5,7, 44, 46, &c. 

The ‘word’ here differs from the 
‘truth’ in σ. 8 as the process differs 
from the result. The ‘truth’ is the 
sum considered objectively of that 
which the ‘word’ expresses. The 
word as a living power makes the 
truth real little by little to him who 
receives it (John viii. 31, 32). And 
further, the ‘word’ is personal: it 
calls up the thought of the speaker: 
it is ‘the word of God” The truth on 
the other hand is abstract, though it 
is embodied in a Person. 

The word, like the truth, can be 
regarded both as the moving principle 
which stirs the man and as the sphere 
in which the man moves. The ‘word 
abides in him’ (John v. 38, comp. viii. 
37), and conversely he ‘abides in the 
word’ (John viii. 31). 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 27 


Additional Note on i. 2. The Fatherhood of God. 


The idea of the Divine Fatherhood, answering to that of human sonship TheDivine 
and childship (see Additional Note on iii. 1), occupies an important place Father- 
in the writings of St John. It cannot be rightly understood without 7°°° 
reference to its development in the Old Testament and in the Synoptic 
Gospels. 

In the Old Testament the general notion of Fatherhood was made i. In the 

personal by the special covenants which He was pleased to establish with Old Testa- 
representative men. He thus became the ‘Father’ of the chosen people meee 
in a peculiar sense (Hx. iv. 22; Deut. xxxii. 6; comp. i 31, viii. 5; Is. Lxiii. 
16, Ixiv. 8; comp. sliii. 1, 6, 21, xliv. 2, 24, xlvi. 3 ff.; Jer. xxxi. 9, 20; Hos. 
xi. 1; Mal. ii. 10; comp. i. 6); and each member of the nation was His 
child (Deut. xiv. 1; Is. i, 2, xxx. 1, 9, xliii. 6, lxiii. 8; Jer. iii. 4, 19; comp. 
Matt. xv. 24, 26). But this sonship was regarded as an exceptional blessing. 
It belonged to the nation as ‘priests and kings’ to the Lord; and so we 
find that the relationship of privilege, in which all the children of Israel 
shared in some manner, was in an especial degree the characteristic of the 
theocratic minister (comp. Ps. Ixxxii. 6). Of the king, the representative 
head of the royal nation, God said ‘ Thou art my Son, this day, that is at 
the moment of the solemn consecration, ‘have I begotten thee’ (Ps. ii. 7): 
and again, ‘ He shall cry unto me: Thou art my Father, my God, and the 
rock of my salvation. Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than 
the kings of the earth’ (Ps. Ixxxix. 26f.; comp. 2 Sam. vii. 12 ff). Comp. 
Ecclus, xxiii. 1, 4. 

It will however be observed on a study of the passages that the idea of This idea 
Fatherhood in the Old Testament is determined by the conceptions of an mited. 
Eastern household, and further that it is nowhere extended to men gene- 
rally. God is the great Head of the family which logks back to Him as its 
Author. His ‘children’ owe Him absolute obedience and reverence: they 
are ‘in His hand’: and conversely He offers them wise counsel and pro- 
tection. But the ruling thought throughout is that of authority and not 
of love. The relationship is derived from a peculiar manifestation of God’s 
Providence to one race (Ex. iv. 22; Hos. xi. 1), and not from the original 
connexion of man as man with God. If the nobility of sonship is to be 
extended to Gentiles, it is by their incorporation in the chosen family (Ps. 

Ixxxvii.). 

So far the conception of a Divine Fatherhood is (broadly speaking) ii. The 
national among the Jews as it was physical in the Gentile world. But in eae of 
the Gospels the idea of Sonship is spiritual and personal. God is revealed as athens 
the Giver and Sustainer (Matt. vii. 9 ff.) of a life like His own, to those who hood inthe 
were created in His image, after His likeness, but who have been alienated Synoptic 
from Him (Luke xv. 11 f£). The original capacity of man to receive God is *osPels. 
declared, and at the same time the will of God to satisfy it. Both facts 
are set forth once for all in the person of Him who was both the Son of 
man and the Son of God. 


“ 


28 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


This idea The idea of the Divine Fatherhood and of the Divine Sonship as realised 
realised in in Christ appears in His first recorded words and in His dedication to His 
Christ. public ministry. The words spoken in the Temple: ‘ Wist ye not that I 
must be in my Father’s house?’ (Luke ii. 49 ἐν τοῖς τοῦ πατρός) appear to 
mark in the Lord, from the human side, the quickened consciousness of His 
mission at a crisis of His life, while as yet the local limitations of worship 
are fully recognised (contrast John iv. 21). The voice at the Baptism 
declares decisively the authority of acknowledged Sonship as that in which 
He is to accomplish His work (Matt. iii. 17 and parallels; comp. John i. 34). 
Declared In the Sermon on the Mount the idea of God’s Fatherhood in relation 
in the Ser- both to Christ and to the disciples is exhibited most prominently. The 
Mea. ne first notice of the sonship of men is remarkable and if rightly interpreted 
most significant: ‘ Blessed are the peacemakers for they shall be called 
sons of God’ (Matt. v. 9). This benediction is seen in its true light by 
comparison with the angelic hymn: ‘On earth peace among men of well- 
pleasing’ (Luke ii. 14). The peace of which Christ speaks is that of 
reunited humanity (comp. Eph. ii. 14 ff.). The blessing of sonship is for those 
who, quickened by God’s Spirit (Rom. viii. 14), help to realise on earth that 
inward brotherhood of which He has given the foundation and the pledge. 
The teaching which follows the beatitude enforces and unfolds this 
thought. The sign of Sonship is to be found in god-like works which 
cannot but be referred at once to their true and heavenly origin (Matt. v. 
16). These are to be in range no less universal than the most universal 
gifts of God, the rain and the sunshine (v. 44 ff£.; Luke vi. 35 ff.), in order that 
the fulness of divine sonship may be attained and manifested (Ὁ. 45 ὅπως 
γένησθε υἱοὶ τοῦ π. ὑ. τοῦ ἐν ovp.; Luke vi. 35 ἔσεσθε υἱοὶ ὑψίστου. At the 
same time the standard of judgment, even all-knowing love, impresses a 
new character upon action (Matt. vi. 1, 4, 6, 18). The obligations of kin- 
dred to others follow from the privilege of kindred with the common 
Father (Matt. vi.14f.; Mark xi. 25). The Father's knowledge anticipates 
the petitions of the children (Matt. vi. 8; Luke xii. 30), and duly provides 
for their wants (Matt. vi. 26 ff.; Luke xii. 24 ff.). Here and elsewhere the 
laws of natural affection are extended to spiritual relations (Matt. vii. 9 ff; 
Luke xi. 11 ff.). 
The eleva- From these passages it will be seen how immeasurably the conception of 
= ὑπὸ Fatherhood is extended by the Lord beyond that in the Old Testament. The 
New Tes. 0nd is moral, and not physical: it is personal and human, and not national. 
tament. [ὑ suggests thoughts of character, of duty, of confidence which belong to a 
believer as such and not peculiarly to those who stand in particular out- 
ward circumstances. In the few other passages in the Synoptic Gospels 
in which the title ‘your Father’ occurs, it has the same force : it conveys 
implicitly grounds of trust and the certainty of future triumph (Mat. x. 
20, 29; Luke xii. 32). The ‘name’ of Him whom the Lord made known 
was, it may be said truly, ‘the Father,’ even as the name of Him who sent 
Moses was ‘Jehovah,’ ‘the absolute,’ ‘the self-existent!? And in this con- 


bi There is really no strict represen- Apocalypse, and even there it is modi- 
tative of the name Jehovah in the New fied: Apoc.i. 4, 8, iv. 8 (ὁ ὧν καὶ ὁ ἦν καὶ 
Testament except in the ὁ ὧν of the ὁ ἐρχ.), Xi. 17, SVL. 5. (ὁ ὧν καὶ ὁ ἦν). 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 29 


nexion the first petition of the Lord’s Prayer gains a new meaning: Our 
Father which art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name—the supreme revela- 
tion of Fatherhood (Matt. vi. 9; comp. Luke xi. 2). 

The revelation of the Father is indeed distinctly claimed by the Lord The reve- 

for Himself alone (Matt. xi. 27; Luke x. 22). True discipleship to Him is lation of 
the fulfilment of ‘His Father’s’ will (Matt. vii. 21). He pronounces with pons 
authority upon the divine counsels and the divine working, as being of of Christ, 
‘His Father’ (Matt. xv. 13, xvi. 17, xviii. 10, 14, 19, 35, XXV. 34, XXVi. 
29; Luke xxii. 29). He speaks of ‘His Father’s promise’ (Luke xxiv. 49), 
and of ‘ His Father’s presence’ (Matt. x. 32 ἢ) with the confidence of a Son. 
But with the confidence of a Son the Lord maintains also the dependence 
ofa Son. Every prayer which He makes will be answered (Matt. xxvi. 53), 
yet He places Himself wholly in ‘His Father’s’ hands (Matt. xxvi. 39, 42); 
and He reserves some things for His Father alone (Matt. xx. 23). 

Such a revelation of the Divine Fatherhood through the Son to sons Distinct- 
definitely distinguishes the Christian doctrine of God from Pantheism ive fea- 
and Theism. As against Pantheism it shews God as distinct from and nach eam 
raised immeasurably above the world; as against Theism it shews God tion. 
as entering into a living fellowship with men, as taking humanity into 
personal union with Himself. The unseen King of the divine Kingdom is 
made known as One to whom His people can draw near with the confi- 
dence of children!. 

The revelation of God as the Father is specially brought out by St iii. The 
John; but in a somewhat different form from that in which it is found in revelation 
the Synoptists. Two titles occur commonly in the Gospel in relation to oo 
Christ: (a) The Father; and (8) My Father. Both of these occur in the g¢ John, 
Synoptists each nine or ten times. But on the other hand St John never 
uses the phrases ὁ πατήρ μου ὁ ἐν οὐρανοῖς (ὁ οὐράνιος), 6 πατὴρ ὑμῶν ὁ ἐν 
οὐρανοῖς, which occur each nine times in the Synoptic Gospels; nor does he 
use the phrase ὁ πατὴρ ὑμῶν except xx. 17 (in contrast); nor yet the 
Pauline phrase ὁ πατὴρ ἡμῶν in his own writings. In the Epistles he uses 


1 The simple title ‘my Father’ is ΧΧΥΪ. 53 παρακαλέσαι τὸν πατέρα 
comparatively rare in the Synoptic μου. 
Gospels. [1015 not found in St Mark But most frequently with the addition 
(comp. viii. 38||Matt. xvi. 27). It oc- ὁ ἐν (rots) οὐρανοῖς (ὁ οὐράνιος). 





curs in St Luke: Vii. 21, Zil. 50 τὸ θέλημα τοῦ π. μ. 
li. 49 (ἐν τοῖς τοῦ π. μ.) τοῦ ἐν (τοῖς) οὐρ. 
x. 22 (parallel to Matt. xi. 27) XE. 32, 33 ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ π. μ. τοῦ 
EXii. 29 (καθὼς διέθετό μοι ὁ π. μ. ἐν (τοῖς) οὐρ. 
βασιλείαν) XV. 13 ἣν οὐκ ἐφύτευσεν ὁ π. μ. ὁ 
EXiv. 49 (τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν τοῦ π. μ.) οὐράνιος 
In St Matthew it is found more fre- ΧΥΪ. 17 οὐκ ἀπεκάλυψεν GAN ὁ π. μ. 
quently ὁ ἐν οὐρ. 
xi. 27 πάντα μοι παρεδόθη ὑπὸ XVill. 10 τὸ πρόσωπον τοῦ π. μ. τοῦ 
τοῦ Tr. μ. ἐν οὐρ. 
XX. 23 οἷς ἡτοίμασται ὑπὸ τοῦ π. μ. 10 γενήσεται αὐτοῖς παρὰ τοῦ 


XXV. 34 οἱ εὐλογημένοι τοῦ π. μ. π. μ. τοῦ ἐν οὐρ. 
ΧΧΥ͂Ϊ, 29 ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τοῦ π. μ. 35 οὕτως καὶ ὁ π. μ. ὁ οὐράνιος 
39, 42 Πάτερ μου ποιήσει ὑμῖν. 








30 


1ῃ contrast 
with that 
in the Sy- 
noptists. 


The title 
‘the Fa- 
ther.’ 


The title 
‘my Fa- 
ther.’ 


The rela- 
tion of the 
two titles. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


uniformly the absolute title ὁ πατήρ (comp. 2 John 3) without any addition ; 
and in the Apoc. ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ (μου) but not ὁ πατήρ. 

These differences though minute are really significant. St John in his 
latest writings regards the relation of the Divine Fatherhood in its eternal, 
that is, in its present, realisation, and not in regard to another order. Or 
to look at the truth from another point of view, St John presents to us the 
Sonship of Christ, the foundation of the sonship of men, from its absolute 
side, while the Synoptists connect it with the fulfilment of the office of the 
Messianic King. 

The full sense of the title ‘the Father’ will be seen by an examination 
of the passages in which the titles ὁ πατήρ and ὁ θεός occur in close con- 
nexion: 


John i. 18 θεόν...εἰς τὸν κόλπον τοῦ πατρός. 

—- iii. 34 ff ὁ θεός.. .τὰ ῥήματα τοῦ θεοῦ...ὁ πατὴρ ἀγαπᾷ...ἡ ὀργὴ τοῦ 
θεοῦ. 

— iv. 21 ff. τῷ πατρί...τῷ πατρί...ὁ πατήρ... πνεῦμα ὁ θεός. 

— vi. 27 ὁ πατήρ, ὁ θεός. 

-- 45 f. θεοῦ...τοῦ πατρός...τὸν πατέρα...τοῦ Oeov...rov πατέρα. 

— Kill. 3 ὅτι πάντα ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ ὁ πατήρ... καὶ ὅτι ἀπὸ θεοῦ ἐξῆλθεν καὶ 
πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ὑπάγει. 

— xiv. 1, 2, 9 τὸν θεόν... τοῦ πατρός μου.. τὸν πατέρα. 

1 John ii. 13 ff. τὸν πατέρα...τοῦ θεοῦ...τοῦ πατρός...τοῦ πατρός.. τοῦ θεοῦ. 
— iii. 1 ὁ πατήρ...θεοῦ. 
— iv. 14 ff. ὁ πατήρ... τοῦ θεοῦ...ὁ θεός...τῷ θεῷ. 


The title ‘my Father’ as used by the Lord marks the special relation 
of God to the Son Incarnate, and so, mediately, to man in virtue of the 
Incarnation, and to all revelation as leading up to it. It is found John ii. 
16, Vv. 17, 43, Vi. 32, 40, viii. 19, 49, 54, X. 18, 25, 29, 37, xiv. 2, 7, 20, 21, 23, 
xv. I, 8, 15, 23, 24, XX. 17. 

As to the relation of the two titles ‘the Father’ and ‘my Father,’ it 
may be said generally that ‘the former suggests those thoughts which 
spring from the consideration of the moral connexion of God and man in 
virtue of the creation of man ‘in the image of God,’ while the latter points 
to those which spring from what has been made known to us in the course 
of the history of the world, the revelation of the connexion of the Incarnate 
Son with God and with man. ‘The Father’ corresponds under this aspect 
with the group of ideas gathered up in the Lord’s title ‘the Son of man’ 
(comp. John vi. 27, viii. 28); and ‘my Father’ with those which are 
gathered up in the titles, ‘the Son of God,’ ‘the Christ.’ 

The first instances in which the Lord uses the two titles seem to mark 
their meaning. 


ii. 16 ὁ οἶκος τοῦ π. μου, comp. Luke ii. 49. 
iv. 21, 23 προσκυνεῖν τῷ πατρί, comp. Matt. xi. 27. 
And the first great discourse which lays the foundation of the Lord’s claims 


unfolds the relation of the Son to the Father and to men, and so of men to 
the Father (John v. 19 ff.). 


In this discourse it will be noticed that the title ‘my Father’ is found 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 31 


at the beginning and the end (vv. 17, 43), but elsewhere only the absolute 
titles ‘the Father, ‘the Son.’ 


The two titles occur not unfrequently in close connexion, ¢.g.: 
John v. 43 ἐλήλυθα ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ πατρός pov. 
-- 45 μὴ δοκεῖτε ὅτι ἐγὼ κατηγορήσω ὑμῶν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα. 
— vi. 27 τοῦτον ὁ πατὴρ ἐσφράγισεν. 
-- 32 ὁ πατήρ μου δίδωσιν ὑμῖν τὸν ἄρτον ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ. 
— xX. 27 διὰ τοῦτό pe ὁ πατὴρ ἀγαπᾷ. 
-- 28 ταύτην τὴν ἐντολὴν ἔλαβον παρὰ τοῦ πατρός μου. 
- 29 ὁ πατήρ μου ὃ δέδωκεν.. «ἁρπάζειν ἐκ τῆς χειρὸς τοῦ πατρός. 
— xiv. 7 τὸν πατέρα μου ἂν ἤδειτε. 
-- 9 6 ἑωρακὼς ἐμὲ ἑώρακεν τὸν πατέρα. 
— XX. 17 οὔπω ἀναβέβηκα πρὸς τὸν πατέρα. 
-- ἀναβαίνω πρὸς τὸν πατέρα pov... 
They are found also in phrases otherwise identical to which they give 
a sensible difference of colour. 
John xiv. 11 ἐγὼ ἐν τῷ πατρὶ καὶ ὃ πατὴρ ἐν ἐμοί, 
-- 20 ἐγὼ ἐν τῷ πατρί μου καὶ ὑμεῖς ἐν ἐμοί. 
- 321 ἐντολὴν ἔδωκέν μοι ὁ πατήρ. 
— x. 18 ταύτην τὴν ἐντολὴν ἔλαβον παρὰ τοῦ πατρός μου. 
If we try to go a little further into detail we notice the title ‘the Use of the 
Father’: title ‘the 
(1) In relation to men: sian 
John iv. 21—3 προσκυνεῖν τῷ πατρί. 
— ν᾿ 45 μὴ δοκεῖτε ὅτι ἐγὼ κατηγορήσω ὑμῶν πρὸς τὸν π. 
— vi. 45 πᾶς ὁ ἀκούσας παρὰ τοῦ π. 
- 46 οὐχ ὅτι τὸν π. ἑώρακέν τις. 
oe 65 ἐὰν μὴ ἦ δεδομένον αὐτῷ ἐκ τοῦ π. 
— X. 29 ἁρπάζειν ἐκ τῆς χειρὸς τοῦ π. 
- 32 ἔδειξα ὑμῖν καλὰ ἐκ τοῦ π. 
— xii, 26 τιμήσει αὐτὸν 6 π. 
— xiv. 6 οὐδεὶς ἔρχεται πρὸς τὸν π. 
-- 8 δεῖξον τὸν π....ἑώρακεν τὸν π. 
— xv. 16 ὅτι ἂν αἰτήσητε τὸν π. 
— xvi. 23 ἄν τι αἰτήσητε τὸν π. 
- 26 ἐρωτήσω τὸν π. περὶ ὑμῶν. 
ae 27 ὁ π. φιλεῖ ὑμᾶς. 
1 John ii. 1 παράκλητον ἔχομεν πρὸς τὸν π. (note). 
- 14 ἐγνώκατε τὸν π. 
-- 15 ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ π. 
-- 16 οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ π. 
— iii. 1 δέδωκεν ἡμῖν ὁ π. 
2 John 4 ἐντολὴν ἐλάβομεν παρὰ τοῦ π. 
(2) In relation to the Son absolutely: 
John i, 18 ὁ ὧν els τὸν κόλπον τοῦ π. 
-- iii, 35 ὁ π. ἀγαπᾷ τὸν υἱόν (comp. XV. 9). 
— ν᾿ 26 ὁ π....τῷ υἱῷ ἔδωκεν. 


32 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


John vi. 46 οὗτος ἑώρακεν τὸν π΄. 

= 57 κἀγὼ ζῶ διὰ τὸν π. 

— Xx. 29 ἐγὼ καὶ ὁ π. ἕν ἐσμεν. 

— xiv. 28 6 π. μείζων μού ἐστιν. 

— xvi. 15 πάντα ὅσα ἔχει 6 π. ἐμά ἐστιν. 

1 John i. 2 ἥτις ἦν πρὸς τὸν 7. 
2 John 3 τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ π΄. 
- 9 καὶ τὸν π. καὶ τὸν υἱὸν ἔχει (comp. 1 John ii. 22 ff.). 
(3) In relation to the Mission of the Son—‘the Father that sent 
me’: 

John v. 23 6 π. ὁ πέμψας αὐτόν. 

-- 36 ἃ δέδωκέν μοι ὁ π...-μαρτυρεῖ ὅτι ὁ π. με ἀπέσταλκεν. 
-- 37, viii. 16, 18, xii. 49, xiv. 24 ὁ πέμψας με πατήρ. 

— vi. 44 ὁ 7. ὁ πέμψας pe. 

— x. 36 ὃν ὁ π. ἡγίασεν καὶ ἀπέστειλεν. 

— xx, 21 καθὼς ἀπέσταλκέν με ὁ π. 

Comp. xvi. 27 f. παρὰ τοῦ π., ἐκ τοῦ π. ἐξῆλθον. 

1 John iv. 14 6 π. ἀπέσταλκεν τὸν υἱόν. 

— ἢ 3, ii, 22, 23, 24 ὁ π.; ὁ vids. 

(4) More particularly in relation to the form of the Mission: 
John v. 36 ἃ δέδωκέν μοι ὁ π. ἵνα τελειώσω αὐτά. 

— vi. 27 ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου. ..τοῦτον ὁ π. ἐσφράγισεν. 

— viii. 28 καθὼς ἐδίδαξέν με 6 π. ταῦτα λαλῶ. 

-- 38 ἃ ἐγὼ ἑώρακα παρὰ τῷ π. λαλῶ. 

— xii. 50 καθὼς εἴρηκέν μοι ὁ π. οὕτως λαλῶ. 

— xiv. 31 καθὼς ἐντολὴν ἔδωκέν μοι ὁ π. οὕτως ποιώ. 

— ΧΥ. 10 καθὼς ἐγὼ τοῦ π. τὰς ἐντολὰς τετήρηκα. 

— xviii. 11 τὸ ποτήριον ὃ δέδωκέν μοι ὁ π. 

(5) And also to the active communion between the Father and the 

Son in the accomplishment of it: 

John v. 19 ff. ἂν μή τι βλέπῃ τὸν π. ποιοῦντα, ὁ 1. πάντα δείκνυσιν αὐτῷ. 
— vi. 37 ὃ δίδωσίν μοι ὁ π. 

— Σ. 15 γινώσκει με ὃ π. κἀγὼ γινώσκω τὸν π. 

-- 38 ἐν ἐμοὶ ὁ π. κἀγὼ ἐν τῷ π. 

— Σὶν. 10 ὁ π: ἐν ἐμοὶ μένων ποιεῖ τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ. 

-- 11 ἐγὼ ἐν τῷ π. καὶ ὁ π. ἐν ἐμοί. 

- 31 ἀγαπῶ τὸν π. 

— XVi. 32 ὁ π. per ἐμοῦ ἐστίν. 

(6) And to the consummation of the Mission: 

John x. 17 διὰ τοῦτό pe ὁ π. ἀγαπᾷ ὅτι ἐγὼ τίθημι τὴν ψυχήν pov. 
— xiv. 12 ἐγὼ πρὸς τὸν π. πορεύομαι. 

= 13 ἵνα δοξασθῇ ὁ π. ἐν τῷ υἱῷ. 

-- 16 ἐρωτήσω roy m. wal ὥλλὸν παράκλητον δώσει. 

-- 28, xvi. 28 πορεύομαι πρὸς τὸν π. 

— xvi. 10 πρὸς τὸν π. ὑπάγω. 

-- 17 ὑπάγω πρὸς τὸν T. 

Comp. xiii. 1 ἵνα μετάβῃ..«πρὸς τὸν π. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 33 
(7) And to the Mission of the Spirit : 


᾿ x = , a a © > oie , 
John xiv. 26 τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον ὃ πέμψει ὁ π. ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί μου. : 
: - A “ 
— Xv. 26 ὁ παράκλητος ὃν ἐγὼ πέμψω ὑμῖν παρὰ τοῦ π.; τὸ πνεῦμα...ὃ 
παρὰ τοῦ π. ἐκπορεύεται. 
— xvi. 25 περὶ τοῦ π. ἀπαγγελῶ ὑμῖν. 


In each respect the particular relation is traced up to the primal 
relation of the perfect divine love expressed in the idea of Fatherhood and 
Sonship. 


The title ‘my Father’ is far more rare than ‘the Father, though it Use of the 
has been not unfrequently substituted for it in the later texts in order to title ‘ My 


bring out a more obvious sense. It fixes attention, as has been already 
remarked, upon the actual circumstances of Christ as the Incarnate Son, 
as serving to convey the true idea of God as Father. 


Hence it is used 


(1) Specially in connexion with the office of Christ as the Fulfiller 
of the old Covenant, the Interpreter of the God of Israel Who had 
been misunderstood by the Jews. Looking to Christ, to His acts and 
words, Israel might see the true character of the Lord. The Son was the 
revelation of His Father : 


John ii. 16 τὸν οἶκον τοῦ π. μ. 
— ν. 17 ὃ π. μ. ἕως ἄρτι ἐργάζεται. 
— νἱ. 32 ὁ π᾿ μ. δίδωσιν ὑμῖν τὸν ἄρτον ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ. 
— viii. 19 οὔτε ἐμὲ οἴδατε οὔτε τὸν π. μ. 
-- 49 τιμῶ τὸν π. μ. 
- 54 ἔστιν ὁ π. μ. ὁ δοξάζων με. 
— Σ. 37 εἰ οὐ ποιῶ τὰ ἔργα τοῦ π. μ. 
— XV. 1 ὁ π᾿ μ. 6 γεωργός ἐστιν. 
-- 8 ἐν τούτῳ ἐδοξάσθη ὁ π. μ. 
ΞΞΞ 23 ὁ ἐμὲ μισῶν καὶ τὸν π. μ. μισεῖ. 
-- 24 μεμισήκασιν καὶ ἐμὲ καὶ τὸν Tr. μ. 


(2) And more widely of the particular aspect under which Christ pre- 
sented the divine character in His own Person and Life : 


John vi. 40 τὸ θέλημα τοῦ π. μ. 
— x. 18 ταύτην τὴν ἐντολὴν ἔλαβον παρὰ τοῦ π. μ. 
— 9 ὅπ. μ. ὃ δέδωκέν μοι. 
— xiv. 2 ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ τοῦ π. μ. 
-- 7 εἰ ἐγνώκειτέ με καὶ τὸν π. μ. ἂν ἤδειτε. 
-- 20 γνώσεσθε ὅτι ἐγὼ ἐν τῷ π. μ. 
-- 21 ἀγαπῶν ἐμὲ ἀγαπηθήσεται ὑπὸ τοῦ π. μ. 
-- 23 6m. p. ἀγαπήσει αὐτόν. 
— xv. 15 ἃ ἤκουσα παρὰ τοῦ π. μ. ἐγνώρισα ὑμῖν. 
— xx. 17 ἀναβαίνω πρὸς τὸν π. μ. καὶ πατέρα ὑμῶν. 


Thus we can see the full force of the phrase ‘I came in My Father’s 
name, and not simply ‘in the Father’s name.’ Christ consummated the 


w. J. 3 


Father.’ 


34 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


earlier teaching and presented in a pattern of complete sacrifice tle fulfil- 
ment of that love which is the source of being : 
John v. 43 ἐλήλυθα ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ π. μ. 
— χ 2ξ τὰ ἔργα ἃ ἐγὼ ποιῶ ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ π. μ. 
Comp. xvii. 6, 11, 12, 26 (τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ π.). 
‘My Father’ in the revelation of Christ brings ‘the Father’ close to 
us (comp. Heb. ii. 11 ff). 
‘Theliving Still one other title must be noticed, ‘the living Father, John vi. 57. 
Father. his phrase is unique, though it corresponds to the common title ‘the 
living God’ (Apoc. vii. 2 θεοῦ ζῶντος, Xv. 7 τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ζῶντος εἰς τοὺς αἱ. 
Matt. xvi. 16 6 υἱὸς τοῦ θ. τοῦ ¢. &c.). In the view which it gives of the 
continuous activity of the divine love it completes the view of the divine 
sovereignty given by the phrase ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν αἰώνων, 1 Tim. 1. 17; Apoc. 
XV. 3. 


Additional Note on i. 7. The idea of Christ's Blood in the 
New Testament’. 


The idea The interpretation of the passages in the New Testament which refer 
of Bloodin to the blessings obtained by the ‘Blood’ of Christ must rest finally upon 
the 0. T. the interpretation given to the use of Blood in the sacrificial system of the 
O.T. Our own natural associations with Blood tend, if not to mislead, at 
least to obscure the ideas which it suggested to a Jew. 
And here it is obvious that the place occupied by Blood in the Jewish 
sacrifices was connected with the general conception attached to it through- 
Theseat of out the Pentateuch. The Blood is the seat of Life in such a sense that it 
Life; and can be spoken of directly as the Life itself (WD Gen. ix. 4; Deut. xii. 23). 
More exactly the Life is said to be ‘in the Blood’ (Lev. xvii. 11). Hence it 
was forbidden to eat flesh with the blood (Gen. ix. 4; Lev. vii. 26 f.; xvii. 
11 ff.; Deut. xii. 23.f.): a man might not use another's life for the support 
of his physical life. 
living For it must be observed that by the outpouring of the Blood the life 
whenshed. which was in it was not destroyed, though it was separated from the 
organism which it had before quickened: Gen. iv. 10; comp. Heb. xii. 
24 (παρὰ τὸν Αβελ); Apoe. vi. 10. 
Appointed This prohibition of the use of Blood as food gave occasion for the 
τ ἊΣ clearest declaration of its significance in sacrifice (Lev. xvii. 10 f.): I will 
ane even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will cut him off 
Jrom among the people. For the soul—life—(WD3) of the flesh is in the 
blood ; and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement 
for your souls—lines (ay nviardy), Jor the Blood, it atones through 
the soul—life (183. W233), ze. its atoning virtue lies not in its material 
substance but in the life of which it is the ‘vehicle’ Moreover, the 
1 On the subject of this note I may pp. 263 ff. Compare Additional Note 


refer to the very suggestive note of Dr on Hebr. ix, 12. 
Milligan, The Resurrection of Our Lord, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 35 


Blood already shed is distinctly treated as living. When it is sprinkled 
‘upon the altar’ it makes atonement in virtue of the ‘life’ which is 
in it. 

Thus two distinct ideas were included in the sacrifice of a victim, the Two 

death of the victim by the shedding of its blood, and the liberation, so to @8P¢¢ts of 
speak, of the principle of life by which it had been animated, so that this a acd. 
life became available for another end’. The ritual of sacrifice took account ding, (2) 
of both these moments in the symbolic act. The slaughtering of the victim, sprink- 
which was properly the work of the offerer, was sharply separated from ling. 
the sprinkling of the blood, which was the exclusive work of the priest. 
The death was inflicted by him who in his representative acknowledged 
the due punishment of his sin; the bringing near to God of the life so 
rendered up was the office of the appointed mediators between God and 
men. Death and life were both exhibited, death as the consequence of 
sin, and life made by the divine appointment a source of life. And it is 
worthy of notice that these two thoughts of the shedding and of the 
sprinkling of the Blood, which embrace the two elements in the conception 
of atonement, were equally expressed by the one word αἱματεκχυσία, 
sanguinis effusio (fusto) V., outpouring of blood (Heb. ix. 22). Thus the 
life was first surrendered aud then united with God. 

So far the thoughts suggested by the Jewish animal sacrifices seem to The Levi- 
be clear; but they were necessarily imperfect and transitional. The union tical use 
between the offerer and the offering was conventional and not real. The ᾿9 065: 

ae Ν : ὴ ., sarily sym- 
victim was irrational, so that there could be no true fellowship between it policaland 
and the offender. Its death was involuntary, so that it could not embody imperfect. 
in the highest form surrender to the divine will. 

All that was foreshadowed by the Mosaic sacrificial system, all that was The idea 
from the nature of the case wanting in it, Christ supplied. With Him, the fulfilled in 
Son of Man, all men are made capable of vital union: in Him all men Eth 
find their true life. His sacrifice of Himself, through life and through 
death, was in every part a reasonable service. He endured the Cross at 
the hands of men. He was at once ‘offered’ and ‘offered Himself’ (Heb. ix. 

14, 28); and by His own blood He entered in once for all into the holy 
place, having obtained eternal redemption for us (Heb. ix. 12). 

Thus in accordance with the typical teaching of the Levitical ordinances Christ’s 
the Blood of Christ represents Christ’s Life (1) as rendered in free self- Blood 
sacrifice to God for men, and (2) as brought into perfect fellowship with Deca 
God, having been set free by death. The Blood of Christ is, as shed, the (2) brought 
Life of Christ given for men, and, as applied, the Life of Christ now given to God 
to men, the Life which is the spring of their life (John xii. 24). In each (Life). 
case the efficacy of the Life of Christ depends, from man’s side, on the 
incorporation of the believer ‘in Christ.’ 

_ It will be evident from what has been said that while the thought of The idea | 
Christ’s Blood (as shed) includes all that is involved in Christ's Death, the of Chee 8 
Death of Christ, on the other hand, expresses only a part, the initial patt, always in- 


cludesthat 
a ae τ of Christ’s 
1 Compare Philo, qu. det. pot.ins.§23, λογικῆς ἀπορρενεῖσα πηγῆς; τς πὶ VEUUG 33 Life. 
1. 207 M.: ἡ μὲν οὖν κοινὴ πρὸς τὰ ἄλογα τύπον τινὰ Kal χαρακτῆρα θείας δυνάμεως, Usage of 
δύναμις οὐσίαν ἔλαχεν αἷμα" ἡ δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἣν ὀνόματι κυρίῳ Μωυσῆς εἰκόνα καλεῖ... St John. 


3—2 


36 


Usage of 
the Epistle 
to the 
Hebrews. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


of the whole conception of Christ’s Blood. The Blood always includes the 
thought of the life preserved and active beyond death. 

This conception of the Blood of Christ is fully brought out in the funda- 
mental passage, John vi. 53—56. Participation in Christ’s Blood is par- 
ticipation in His life (v. 56). But at the same time it is implied throughout 
that it is only through His Death—His violent Death—that His Blood 
can be made available for men. 

In the other passages of St John’s writings, where reference is made to 
the Blood of Christ, now one part of the whole conception and now the 
other predominates. In Apoc. i. 5 τῷ ἀγαπῶντι ἡμᾶς καὶ λύσαντι ἡμᾶς ἐκ 
τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν [ἡμῶν] ἐν τῷ αἵματι αὐτοῦ, and in Apoc. ν. 9 ὅτι ἐσφάγης καὶ 
ἠγόρασας τῷ θεῷ ἐν τῷ αἵματι, the idea of the single act, the pouring out 
of blood in death, is most prominent and yet not exclusively present. 
In the one case the present participle (ἀγαπῶντι) seems to extend the act 
beyond the moment of accomplishment; and in the other ἐν τῷ αἵματι 
is felt to add something to ἐσφάγης which is not included in it. The 
Blood is not simply the price by which the redeemed were purchased but 
the power by which they were quickened so as to be capable of belonging 
to God. 

On the other hand in Apoc. xii, 11 ἐνίκησαν αὐτὸν διὰ τὸ αἷμα τοῦ 
apviov, Apoc. vii. 14 ἐλεύκαναν αὐτὰς [ras στολάς] ἐν τῷ αἵματι τοῦ dpviov, 
1 John i. 7 τὸ αἷμα Ἰησοῦ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ καθαρίζει ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ πάσης ἁμαρτίας, 
the conception of the Blood as an energetic power, as a fountain of life, 
opened by death and flowing still, is clearly marked. 

This latter thought explains the stress which St John lays on the issue 
of the blood and the water from the side of the Lord after the Crucifixion 
(John xix. 34; 1 John v. 6 ff. notes). That which was outwardly, phy- 
sically, death, was yet reconcileable with life. Christ lived even in Death 
and through Death. 

The simple idea of the Death of Christ, as separated from His Life, 
falls wholly into the background in the writings of St John (John xi. 50 f.; 
xviii. 14; xii. 24f., 33; xviii. 32). [Ὁ is only in the words of Caiaphas that 
the virtue of Christ’s death is directly mentioned. In this respect his 
usage differs from that of St Paul and St Peter (πάσχειν). If the Good 
Shepherd ‘lays down His life for the sheep’ (John x. 11), this last act only 
reveals the devotion of His care for them. 

In the Epistle to the Hebrews the manifold efficacy of Christ's Blood is 
directly illustrated by a parallel with two representative sacrifices, the 
Covenant Sacrifice by which Israel was brought into fellowship with God 
(Heb. ix. 15 ff.), and the Service of the Day of Atonement, by which the 
broken fellowship was again restored (Heb. ix. 11 ff). 

The Blood of Christ is the Blood of the New Covenant: Heb. ix. 1 5 ff. 
See Matt. xxvi. 28; Mk. xiv. 24; Le. xxii. 20; 1 Cor. xi. 25, 27 (comp. 1 Cor. 
x. 16); and it is the Blood through which He as our High Priest enters 
into the Presence of God for us: Heb. ix. 12, 23 ff.; comp. xiii. 12, i. 3. 
These two aspects of the truth need to be carefully regarded. By ‘sprink- 
ling’ of Christ’s Blood the believer is first brought into fellowship with 
God in Christ; and in the imperfect conduct of his personal life, the life of 
Christ is continually communicated to him for growth and cleansing. He 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 37 


himself enters into the Divine Presence ‘in the Blood of Jesus’ (Heb. x. 19) 
surrounded, as it were, and supported by the Life which flows from Him! 
Similar thoughts find expression in the other writings of the New Usage in 


Testament. Thus we read with predominant reference to the initial act of other 


salvation : beets of 
Acts xx. 28 τὴν ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ θεοῦ ἣν περιεποιήσατο διὰ τοῦ αἵματε. 


τοῦ ἰδίου. 

1 Pet. i. 18 Ε ἐλυτρώθητε.. τιμίῳ αἵματι ὡς ἀμνοῦ ἀμώμου καὶ ἀσπίλου 
Χριστοῦ. 

Col. i. 20 εἰρηνοποιήσας διὰ τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ σταυροῦ αὐτοῦ. 

But even in such cases the first act is not regarded as an isolated act of 
forgiveness. It is the beginning of a state which continues: 

Rom. v. 9 δικαιωθέντες viv ἐν τῷ αἵματι αὐτοῦ σωθησόμεθα 8 αὐτοῦ. 

Eph. i. 7 ἐν ᾧ ἔχομεν τὴν ἀπολύτρωσιν διὰ τοῦ αἵματος αὐτοῦ. 

Eph. ii. 13 ἐγενήθητε ἐγγὺς ἐν τῷ αἵματι τοῦ Χριστοῦ. 

In other places the thought of the continuous efficacy of Christ’s Blood 
as a power of life is even more conspicuous: 

I Pet. i. 2 (ἐκλεκτοῖς) εἰς ὑπακοὴν καὶ ῥαντισμὸν αἵματος Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ. 

Heb. ix. 14 τὸ αἷμα τοῦ Χριστοῦ...καθαριεῖ τὴν συνείδησιν ἡμῶν ἀπὸ 
νεκρῶν ἔργων εἰς τὸ λατρεύειν θεῷ ζῶντι. 

Heb. x. 19 ἔχοντες .-παρρησίαν εἰς τὴν εἴσοδον τῶν ἁγίων ἐν τῷ αἵματι 
Ἰησοῦ.. .-προσερχώμεθα... 

Heb. xii 24 (προσεληλύθατε) αἵματι ῥαντισμοῦ κρεῖττον λαλοῦντι παρὰ 
τὸν Αβελ. 

The two elements which are thus included in the thought of Christ’s 1Johni.9. 
Blood, or, in the narrower sense of the word, of Christ’s Death and Christ’s 
Blood, that is of Christ’s Death (the Blood shed) and of Christ’s Life (the 
Blood offered), are indicated clearly in v. 9 [God] ts faithful and righteous 
to forgive us our sins (the virtue of Christ’s Death); and to cleanse us 
Jrom all unrighteousness (the virtue of Christ’s Life). 


Additional Note on i. 9. The idea of sin in St John. 


The treatment of the doctrine of sin by St John requires to be con- The idea 
sidered briefly in its main features for the understanding of many details 24 πὶ τῇ 
in the Epistle. ‘Sin,’ St John says in a phrase of which the terms are rae 
made convertible, ‘is lawlessness’ (c. 111, 4 ἁμαρτία ἐστὶν ἡ ἀνομία, pec- 
catum est iniguitas V.). The description is absolutely exhaustive. Man 
is constituted with a threefold relation, a threefold obligation to self, 
to the world, to God. To violate the ‘law’ by which this relation is de- 
fined in life ig ‘to sin. Each conscious act by which the law is broken 


1 Compare a remarkable passage of καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι πιεῖν τὸ αἷμα τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ 
Clement of Alexandria: διττὸν δὲ τὸ τῆς κυριακῆς μεταλαβεῖν ἀφθαρσίας" ἰσ- 
αἷμα τοῦ κυρίου, τὸ μὲν γάρ ἐστιν αὐτοῦ χὺς δὲ τοῦ λόγου τὸ πνεῦμα, ὡς αἷμα 
σαρκικόν, ᾧ τῆς φθορᾶς λελυτρώμεθα, τὸ σαρκός (Peed. ii. “, § 109). 


δὲ πνευματικόν, τούτεστιν ᾧ κεχρίσμεθα. 


38 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


is ‘a sin’: the principle which finds expression in the special acts is ‘sin’ 
(ἡ ἁμαρτία, John i, 29). 
Sin is self; | When traced back to its last form this ‘sin’ is the self-assertion of the 
assertion, finite in violation of the limits which guide the harmonious fulfilment of 


oe the idea of its being. Every such act, being in its essence self-regarding, 

hatred. self-centred, must be a violation of ‘love.’ Thus lawlessness is under 
another aspect selfishness; or as it is characterised by St John, ‘hatred’ 
in opposition to love (1 John ii. 9; 111, 14f.; ἵν. 20). There can be essentially 
no middle term. 

The re- The ‘law’ which determines man’s right conduct finds manifold declara- 

vealedlaw. tion, through special divine utterances (John xvii. 8, ῥήματα), commandments 
(c. ii. 3 ἐντολαί), which are gathered up in the unity of one revelation (λόγος) 
without and within (c. ii. 7, 14). To disregard any of these is to sin. 

‘Sin,’ It follows that ἁμαρτία (‘a sin, ‘sin’) and ἁμαρτάνειν (‘to sin’) have two 

‘sins.’ distinct meanings. ‘Apapria may describe a single act impressed by the 


sinful character (1 John v. 16 f.), or sin regarded in the abstract (John xvi. 
8 f.). And again ἁμαρτάνειν may be ‘to commit a sinful act’ (6. 1. 10) or ‘to 
present a sinful character’ (c. iii. 6). The plural ἁμαρτίαι offers no ambi- 
guity (John viii. 24; xx. 23; 1 John i. 9; ii. 2, 12; iii, 5; iv. 10; comp. 
Apoe. i. 5; xviii. 4 f.). 
The sinful = This distinction between the principle, the power, of sin and the mani- 
character. festation of the power in individual sins is of primary importance. The 
wrong-doer embodies sin in deed (c. iii. 4, 8 ὁ ποιῶν τὴν ἁμαρτίαν, comp. 
John viii. 34), just as the right-doer embodies the Truth (c. i. 6 ποιεῖν τὴν 
ἀλήθειαν); and by so doing he contracts a character corresponding to his 
deeds (c. i. 8 ἔχει ἁμαρτίαν). 

Sin, as a fact, is universal (1 John i. 10); and the end of sin is death 
(James i. 15). Or, as St John states the case, looking at the eternal re- 
lations of things, man in his natural state is ‘in death’ (x John iii, 14 
μεταβεβήκαμεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτου εἰς τὴν ζωήν; comp. John v. 24, 40; Matt. viii. 
22 || Le. ix. 60; Le. xv. 24). ‘The wrath of God abideth upon him’ (John 
111. 36 μένει en’ αὐτόν ; comp. Eph. ii. 3 τέκνα φύσει ὀργῆς). He needs ‘sal- 
vation’ (σώζειν John iii. 17; v. 34; x. 93 xii. 47; σωτήρ John iv. 42, 1 Jobn 
iv. 14; ἡ σωτηρία John iv. 22; comp. Apoe. vii. 10; xii. 10; xix. 1). 

It may come to pass that ‘sin’ and ‘sins’ surround the sinner and 
become as it were the element in which he exists (John viii. 21 ἐν τῇ 
ἁμαρτίᾳ, 24 ἐν ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις, comp. 1 John v. 19 ἐν τῷ πονηρῷ κεῖται). He 
who sins ‘has not seen God’ (1 John iii. 6. ‘Darkness’ not only hinders 
the use of sight but destroys the organ of sight (1 John ii. 11). There 
is even in the Christian body a sin unto death (c τ᾿ 16 ἁμαρτία πρὸς θάνατον, 


All men as 
sinfulneed 
salvation. 


1 This use of ἡ ἁμαρτία is not found 
in the Synoptic Gospels nor in the Acts. 
It occurs in St Paul: Rom. v. 12, ὅσ. 

Many of the special terms which are 
used for sin in different aspects in 
other writings of the New Testament, 
are wanting in St John, 6.0. ἀσεβεῖν, 
ἀσέβεια (St Paul, St Peter, St Jude), 
παραβαίνειν, παράβασις, παραβάτης (St 


Matthew, St Paul, Hebrews, St James; 
in 2 John g read προάγων); (παρανομεῖν, 
παρανομία); παράπτωμα (παραπίπτειν) 
(St Matthew, St Mark, St Paul). He 
commonly speaks of sin under the 
terms ‘ darkness,’ ‘hatred,’ ‘ wander- 
ing.’ Compare the very interesting 
enumeration of typical forms of sin 
in Ecclus, sli. 17 ἢ, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 39 


peccatum ad mortem V.) which excludes from the privileges of the Chris- 
tian society, the natural forces of the Christian life. 

The efficacy of Christ’s work extends both to sin and sins. As ‘the Christ 
Lamb of God’ ‘He taketh away the sin of the world’ (John i. 29 ὁ ἀμνὸς deals with 
τοῦ θεοῦ, ὁ αἴρων τὴν ἁμαρτίαν τοῦ κόσμου, V. Agnus Dei...qui tollit pecca- δὴ δὰ 
tum mundi); and again ‘He was manifested that He may take away sins,’ ἢ 
not simply ‘our sins’ (1 John iii. 5 ἐφανερώθη ἵνα ἄρῃ τὰς ἁμαρτίας, ap- 
paruit ut peccata tolleret V.). Under another aspect this ‘removal of sins’ 
is an ‘undoing,’ an ‘abrogation of the works of the devil’ (c. 111. 8 ἐφαν- 
ερώθη ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ iva λύσῃ τὰ ἔργα τοῦ διαβόλου, apparuit Filius Dei ut 
dissolvat opera diaboli V.). 

The consequences of sin once committed place the need of the sinner in Sin brings 
a clear light. Sin unless it be taken away ‘abideth’ (John ix. 41); and debt, 
its consequences fall under three main heads. The sinner incurs a debt; been 
he falls into bondage; and he is estranged from God. The particular act from God. 
calls for a proportionate reparation, the moral discipline of the debtor 
coinciding with the satisfaction due to the broken law; the wrong-doing 
impairs so far the powers of the doer; and it also places a barrier between 
him and God. The notion of debt (Matt. vi. 12) is recognised in that 
of the ‘remission’ of sins (c. i. 9; John xx. 23): the notion of bondage 
finds a most emphatic exposition in John viii. 32 ff: ‘the love of the 
Father’ is incompatible with the love of the world, out of which sin springs 
(1 John ii. 15 ff; comp. Eph. iv. 18; Col. i. 21). 

Thus it is that man needs forgiveness, redemption, reconciliation. For- Forgive- 
giveness in order to be complete involves not only the remission of the 988. 
penalty of the deed but the removal of the direct results of the act on the 
doer. As long asa debtor finds that his debt is remembered though the 
payment of it will not be exacted, forgiveness is not complete. The 
exercise of such a power of forgiveness corresponds with a new creation. 

Thus when the Lord claims as Son of man the power of the forgiveness of 
sins He offers as a sign of it a creative act (Matt. ix. 5 f; comp. John v. 
14). And so St John appeals to the divine promise assured to the penitent 
to ‘forgive their sins and cleanse them from all unrighteousness’ (1 John 
1. 9). 

ues again includes two elements, the deliverance of the sinner Redemp- 
from thraldom to a foreign power, and the restoration of his lost strength. tion. 
St John does not use the group of words connected with λύτρον (λυτροῦσθαι, 
λυτρωτής, λύτρωσις, ἀντίλυτρον), but he has the simple Avo (Apoc. 1. 5); and 
in the Apocalypse he carries out the notion yet further, representing Chris- 
tians as ‘bought’ for God (v. 9; xiv. 3 f). 

Man’s estrangement from God by sin can also be regarded in two ways. Reconcili- 
Sin cannot but be a.bar to God’s love; and conversely man as sinful ation. 
cannot love God. He requires a change in condition and a change in 
feeling, propitiation and reconcilement. The latter thought finds its 
plainest expression in the group of words καταλλάσσειν, ἀποκαταλλάσσειν, 
καταλλαγή, which are peculiar to St Paul: the former in the group 
ἱλάσκομαι, ἱλασμός, ἱλαστήριον. The change in the personal relation of 
man to God, from the side of man, indicated by ‘reconcilement’ (2 Cor. v. 

18—20; Rom. v. 10 ἢ), is referred to its source by St John, who shews that 


40 


All flow 
from fel- 
lowship 
in Christ. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


the love of God in the Mission of His Son calls out man’s love (1 John iv. 10). 
On the other hand God looks with good pleasure on man in Christ: Christ 
is ‘the propitiation for our sins’ (c. ii. 2). ‘He loosed us from our sins in 
His blood’ (Apoe. i. 5). ‘His blood cleanseth from all sin’ (i. 7; comp. 
Heb. i. 3 καθαρισμὸν dy. ποιησάμενος, Acts xxii. 16 ἀπόλουσαι τὰς ἁμ.)}. 

The last phrases lead at once to St John’s view of the way in which the 
work of the Word Incarnate avails for forgiveness, for redemption, for 
reconcilement, By dying on the Cross He made His Life—His blood— 
available for all who believe in Him. The gift of God is eternal, divine, 
life, ‘and this life is in His Son’ (1 John v. 11 ἢ). The possession of such 
life is the destruction of past sin, and safety from sin to come (1 John iii. 9). 
By incorporation with Christ the believer shares the virtue of His humanity 
(John vi. 51, 57). Thus finally unbelief in Him is the test of sin (John 
xvi. 9). 

Compare additional notes on i. 7; ii. 2, 13. 

It may be added that it will be evident from this sketch of the teaching 
of the N.T. on sin, according to which the fundamental conception of sin is 
the self-assertion of the finite against the infinite, that the relation of good 
to evil is not one which exists of necessity in the nature of things. The 
difference is not metaphysical, inherent in being, so that the existence of 
evil is involved in the existence of good; nor physical, as if there were an 
essential antagonism between matter and spirit; but moral, that is 
recognised in the actual course of life, so that evil when present is known 
to be opposed to good. 


1 It will be of interest to put to- 
gether without any discussion the 
various phrases which describe the 
action of Christ with regard to sin 
and sins. 

(1) As to sin itself, He brought 
condemnation by His Incarnation; 
Rom. viii. 3 6 θεὸς τὸν ἑαυτοῦ 
υἱὸν πέμψας.. κατέκρινε τὴν ἁμαρ- 
τίαν ἐν τῇ σαρκί. 
disannulling by His sacrifice: Heb. 
ix. 26 els ἀθέτησιν τῆς ἁμαρτίας, 
διὰ τῆς θυσίας abrot πεφανέρω- 
ται... Comp. Rom. vi. 7 ὁ ἀπο- 
θανὼν δεδικαίωται ἀπὸ τῆς au. 
(2) As to the sins of men Christ 
makes propitiation for them: Heb. 
ii. 17...dpxcepeds...els τὸ ἱλάσκεσ- 
θαι τὰς ἁμαρτίας τοῦ λαοῦ. 


forgives them: Matt. ix. 2 ff.: 
ἀφίενταί cov ai ἁμαρτίαι. Comp. 
Col. ii. 13 χαρισάμενος τὰ παρα- 
πτώματα. 

takes them away, by bearing them: 
1 John iii. 5 ἵνα ἄρῃ τὰς ἅμαρ- 
τίας ; John i. 29 ὁ αἴρων τὴν ἁμαρ- 
τίαν τοῦ κόσμου. Comp. Heb. x. 4 
ἀφαιρεῖν ἁμ.; X. τι περιελεῖν ap. 

looses men from them: Αροο. i. 
5 τῷ.«λύσαντι ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῶν du. 
ἐν τῷ αἵματι αὐτοῦ. Comp. Rom. 
Vi. 22 ἐλευθερωθέντες ἀπὸ τῆς ἁμ. 

cleanses men from all sin: 1 John 
i. 7 τὸ αἷμα ᾿Ιησοῦ.. καθαρίζει ἡμ. 
ἀπὸ π. ἁμ. 

saves from sins: Matt. i. 21 σώσει 
++.70 τῶν ἀμ. 


IT. 17 
II. 


1. THe REMEDY FOR SIN AND 
THE SIGN THAT IT IS EFFECTUAL (ii. 
1---6). 

Having dealt with the fact of sin 
and the false pleas by which man en- 
deavours to do away with its signifi- 
cance, St John states 

1 The divine remedy for sin (vz. 1, 2). 

2 The sign that the remedy is effec- 
tual in any particular case (vv. 3—6). 

The first sub-section answers to the 
counter-statements made in relation to 
the first two pleas of men (i. 7, 9), but 
it has a prominent distinctness of form, 
as giving the complete answer to the 
problem raised in i. 5s—1o. The as- 
surance of the forgiveness of sin when 
combined with the fact of its univer- 
sality might lead some to underrate 
its evil. In order to remove the last 
semblance of support for such an 
error, St John shews that the na- 
ture of the remedy for sin is such as 
to move men most powerfully to 
shrink from all sin and to help them 
to avoid it. 

This connexion is partly indicated 
by Augustine: Male vis esse securus, 
sollicitus esto. Fidelis enim est et 
justus ut dimittat nobis delicta nostra 
si semper tibi displiceas et muteris 
donec perficiaris. Ideo quid sequitur? 
Filioli mei, hee scribo vobis ut non 
peccetis. 


1. The divine remedy for sin 
(ii. I, 2). 

1My little children, these things I 
erite to you that ye may not sin. 
And if anyone sin, we have an advo- 
cate with the Father, Jesus Christ, 
the righteous; *and himself is a 
propitiation for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the whole 
world. 

The fact of sin as something which 
is irreconcileable with God and fruit- 
ful in consequences raises the ques- 
tions of propitiation and mediation. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 41 


ττ, ψ' ΄- ΄ con {Ψ Ve , 
εκνία μου, ταῦτα Ypapw ὑμῖν ἵνα μη ἁμαρ- 


How, it may be asked, is that forgive- 
ness, that cleansing, already spoken 
of (i. 7, 9), brought about? The answer 
is given in the summary description 
of Christ’s work. Christ is a universal 
propitiation for sins; and He is an 
advocate for the Christian. He has 
accomplished a work on earth for all: 
He is accomplishing a work in heaven 
for those who are united with Him. 
Both in Person (righteous) and in 
work (propitiation) He is fitted to 
fulfil the office which our necessities 
require. These thoughts are treated 
in the inverse order, because the Apo- 
stle approaches the subject from the 
side of believers (we have). 

It has been already noticed that 
the third plea (i. 10, we have not 
sinned) is not treated exactly as the 
two former. Symmetry would have 
required a clause answering to the 
assertion ‘we have not sinned? St 
John might, for example, have con- 
tinued: ‘if we sin....2. But he shrinks 
naturally from regarding sin as a 
normal element in the Christian life; 
and therefore he changes the mode 
of dealing with the subject. Before 
touching on the fact of sin, as indeed 
part of the believer's experience to 
the last, he asserts the end of his 
teaching, which is sinlessness. This 
is the end; and even if it cannot be 
gained by the believer’s effort and 
directly, it can be gained through the 
Saviour’s work. That which is true 
of the past (i. 9) is true throughout. 

1. τεκνία μου] jilioli mei V., my 
little children. The form adopted in 
i. 7,9 is changed for one more direct 
and personal. The thought of sin as a 
reality for each one moves the Apostle 
to address with the utmost tenderness 
those to whom he stands in the rela- 
tion of a father. The title rexvia oc- 
curs in John xiii. 33 and ¢. ii. 12, 28; 
iil. 7, 18; iv. 4; v.21 (Gal. iv. 19 rexvia 
μου is uncertain). The full title τεκνία 


42 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


TNTE. 


pov is found only here (c. iii. 18 is a 
false reading). Δ commentary on St 
John’s use of the word is given by 
the story (μῦθος οὐ μῦθος) of the 
young Robber (Euseb. H. £. iii. 23). 

ταῦτα γράφω] these things I rrite, 
not only all that has been already said 
as to the nature of God and as to the 
reality, the nature, and the fact of sin 
(i. 5—10), but, as i. 4, all that is pre- 
sent to the mind of the Apostle as the 
substance of his letter, though indeed 
the preceding section includes all by 
implication. 

The use of the singular, J ecrite (vv. 
7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 21, 26; v. 13; contrast 
i. 4) follows from ‘my dear children,’ 

iva μὴ ἁμάρτητε] ut non peceetis V., 
that ye may not sin. The phrase 
is absolute. The thought is of the 
single act (ἁμάρτητε) not of the state 
(ἁμαρτάνητε); and the tense is decisive 
against the idea that the Apostle is 
simply warning his disciples not to 
draw encouragement for licence from 
the doctrine of forgiveness. His aim 
is to produce the completeness of the 
Christ-like life (v. 6). 

The difference of the aor. and pres. 
conj. in connexion with ἵνα is well 
illustrated by John v. 20, 23; vi. 28 f. 

kat ἐάν τις... sed et si quis V., i.e. ἐὰν 
δὲ καί, si quis Aug., and if any... The 
declaration of the remedy for sin is 
placed as part of the main declara- 
tion of St John. It is not set as a 
contrast (i. 7 ἐὰν δέ), nor simply as a 
parallel clause (i. 9 ἐὰν ὁμολογῶμεν); 
but as a continuous piece of the one 
message. Here again the thought is 
of the single act (ἁμάρτῃ) regarded 
as past, into which the believer may 
be carried against the true tenor of 
his life (i. 7), as contrasted with the 
habitual state (ἁμαρτάνει iii. 6, 8, 9; v. 
18). Nothing is said in one direction 
or the other of the possibility of a 
Christian life actually sinless. 

The change of construction in the 


[Il 1 


2 ¢ ‘A tf f \ 
καὶ éav τις ἁμαρτή, παράκλητον ἔχομεν προς 


sentence is remarkable. St John 
writes 7 any one...tce... and not if 
ye sin,..yé.... nor yet if we sin... 
we...or if any one...he..., in order 
to bring out the individual character 
of the offence, and then to shew that 
he is speaking of the Christian body 
with which he identifies himself, 
and to which Christ’s promises are 
assured. This is forcibly pointed out 
by Augustine: Non dixit Aabetis, nec 
me habetis dixit, nec ipsum Christum 
habetis dixit; sed et Christum posuit 
non se, et habemus dixit non habetis. 
Maluit se ponere in numero pecca- 
torum ut haberet advocatum Chris- 
tum quam ponere se pro Christo advo- 
catum et inveniri inter damnandos 
superbos. Comp. Hebr. x. 26 n. 

ἔχομεν] we have as a divine gift. 
Comp. ii. 23; v. 12; 2 John 9. 

παράκλητον] advocatum V., an ad- 
rocate. This is the uniform render- 
ing of the Latin and English Ver- 
sions in this place, and is unques- 
tionably correct, although the Greek 
fathers give to it, as in the Gospel, an 
active seuse, ‘consoler,’ ‘comforter.’ 
Christ as Advocate pleads the cause 
of the believer against his ‘accuser’ 
(κατήγωρ Apoc. xii. 10; comp. Zech. 
lil. τ; ἀντίδικος 1 Pet. v. 8). In this 
work the ‘other Advocate’ (John xiv. 
16), the Spirit of Christ, joins (Rom. 
viii. 26, 34).. 

One aspect of the Advocate’s office 
was foreshadowed by the entrance of 
the High Priest into the Holy of 
Holies on the Day of Atonement 
(Heb. ix. rr ff, 24; vii. 25). 

For the meaning of the term παρά- 
kAntos in the Gospel of St John (xiv. 
16, 26; xv. 26; xvi. 7) see note on 
xiv. 16. 

It will be noticed that in the con- 
text of the passage in which the Lord 
promises ‘another Advocate’ (John 
xiv. 16), He sets forth His own advyo- 
cacy (xiv. 12 ff). 


II. 2] 


\ id - 
τὸν πατέρα ᾿Ϊησοῦν Χριστὸν δίκαιον, 


Augustine applies the legal image 
in a striking parallel: Si aliquando in 
hac vita committit se homo disertze 
linguze et non perit, committis te 
Verbo et periturus es? 

The reference to the Advocate im- 
plies that the Christian on his part 
has effectually sought His help. This 
is assumed, and indicated by the 
change of person (we Christians have). 

Clement of Rome (i. 36) speaks of 
the Lord under a corresponding title: 
«εὕρομεν τὸ σωτήριον ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦν 
Χριστόν, τὸν ἀρχιερέα τῶν προσφορῶν 
ἡμῶν, τὸν προστάτην (patronum) καὶ 
βοηθὸν τῆς ἀσθενείας ἡμῶν. 

πρὸς τὸν πατέρα] apud patrem V., 
ad patrem Aug. (apud deum patrem 
Tert.), with the Father, not simply 
in His Presence, but turned toward 
Him, addressing Him with continual 
pleadings. Comp. c. 1. 2; John i. 1. 

Christ’s advocacy of man is ad- 
dressed to God in that relation of 
Fatherhood which has been fully re- 
vealed in the Son who has taken man- 
hood to Himself (πρὸς τὸν πατέρα not 
πρὸς τὸν θεόν). 

Comp. i. 2 ἦν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα; 1..3 
μετὰ τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ μετὰ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐ- 
τοῦ; ii, 14 ἐγνώκατε τὸν πατέρα; ii. 15 
ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ πατρός; ii. 16 οὐκ ἔστιν 
ἐκ τοῦ πατρός; ii. 22 6 ἀρνούμενος τὸν 
πατέρα καὶ τὸν υἱόν; ii, 23 ὁ ὁμολογῶν 
τὸν υἱὸν καὶ τὸν πατέρα ἔχει; ii. 24 ἐν 
τῷ υἱῷ καὶ [ἐν] τῷ πατρί; iti. τ δέδωκεν 
ἡμῖν ὁ πατήρ; iv. 14 ὁ πατὴρ ἀπέσταλ- 
κεν τὸν υἱόν. 

In every case this special concep- 
tion is important for the fulness of 
the argument. See Additional Note 
on i. 2. 

And on the other side man’s Advo- 
cate is described by that compound 
name Jesus Christ, which presents 
Him in His humanity and also as the 
promised Saviour and King of man- 
kind, the Son of man, and the Son of 
David. See Additional Note on iii. 23. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 43 
"kal αὐτὸς 
δίκαιον] the righteous. The ad- 


jective is not a simple epithet but 
marks predicatively (‘being as He is 
righteous’) that characteristic of the 
Lord which gives efficacy to His ad- 
vocacy of man. 

This rests (so to speak) not on His 
divine nature as Son of God, but on 
His human character (comp. 1 Pet. iii. 
18). 

He has Himself fulfilled and pleads 
for the fulfilment of that which is right 
according to the highest law. He is 
not an advocate who wishes to set 
aside the law but to carry it out and 
apply it. In Him the idea of manhood 
has obtained its absolute satisfaction, 
and in turn He claims that the virtue 
of this satisfaction be extended .to 
all in fellowship with Himself. 

The righteousness of Christ as pre- 
sented here answers to the righteous- 
ness of the Father brought forward in 
i. 9: He accomplishes perfectly all that 
is set forth in the revelation of the 
Father's Nature. By this righteous- 
ness He fulfils in fact the conditions 
which the High Priest fulfilled in sym- 
bol. Comp. Heb. vii. 26. 

The thought of righteousness as a 
divine attribute belongs peculiarly to 
St John: John xvii. 25 πατὴρ dicate; 
c. i. 9; ii. 29; iii. 7. Comp. Rom. iii. 
26. 
Nothing is said of the manner of 
Christ’s pleading: that is a subject 
wholly beyond our present powers. It 
is enough that St John represents it 
as the act of a Saviour still living 
(Heb. vii. 25) and in a living relation 
with His people. His work for them 
continues as real as during His earthly 
life (Le. xxii. 32; xxiii. 34; John xvii. 
24), though the conditions of it are 
changed. Heis still acting personally 
in their behalf, and not only by. the 
unexhausted and prevailing power of 
what He has once done. He Him- 
self uses for His people the virtue of 


44 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[II. 2 


΄ - cal e cr > A a 
ἱλασμος ἐστιν περὶ THY ἁμαρτιῶν ἡμῶν, OV περί τῶν 


© 4 \ ef 5 ΄ 
ἡμετέρων δὲ μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ περὶ ὅλου τοῦ κοσμου. 


2 id. ἐστιν NBC: ἐστ. ἱλ. A vg. 
Rom, iii. 29. 


that work which He accomplished on 
earth. 

Bede says well: Unigenito Filio 
pro homine interpellare est apud co- 
eeternum Patrem se ipsum hominem 
demonstrare; eique pro humana na- 
tura rogasse est eandem naturam in 
divinitatis suze celsitudine suscepisse. 
Interpellat ergo pro nobis Dominus 
non voce sed miseratione, quia quod 
damnare in electis noluit suscipiendo 
servavit. 

2. καὶ αὐτός... et ipse V., and He, 
or rather, and He Himself (Matt. i. 
21). The emphatic pronoun enforces 
the thought of the efficacy of Christ’s 
advocacy as ‘righteous’ He who 
pleads our cause, having fulfilled the 
destiny of man, is at the same time 
the propitiation for our sins. Comp. 
v.25; ¢. 1. 7; iv. το, 19 (3 John Io); 
John ii. 25; iv. 44; v. 20; vi. 6 (xii. 
49); 1 Pet. ii. 24. 

The ideas of ‘advocacy’ and ‘ pro- 
pitiation’ are distinct, and yet in close 
connexion. The latter furnishes the 
basis of the former: the latter is 
universal, while the former, so far 
as it is revealed, is exercised for be- 
lievers. It is to be noticed further 
that the ‘propitiation’ itself is spoken 
of as something eternally valid (He is) 
and not as past (He was; comp. iii. 16 
τὴν ψυχὴν ἔθηκεν). 

ἵλασμός] propitiatio V., a propi- 
tiation. Comp. iv. 10. The Latin 
renderings are unusually numerous. 
Besides propitiatio which prevailed, 
exoratio, deprecatio, placatio are 
found, and also the verbal renderings 
(tpse) exorat, interpellat, postulat 
pro... And Augustine has in some 
places propitiator. Christ is said to 
be the ‘propitiation’ and not simply 
the ‘propitiator’ (as He is called 


μόνον NAC vg: μόνων B me the; comp. 


the ‘Saviour’ iv. 14), in order to 
emphasise the thought that He is 
Himself the propitiatory offering as 
well as the priest (comp. Rom. iii. 25). 
A propitiator might make use of 
means of propitiation, outside himself. 
But Christ is our propitiation, as He 
is ‘our life’ (Col. iii. 4), our ‘righte- 
ousness, sanctification and redemp- 
tion’ (1 Cor. i. 31). He does not 
simply guide, teach, quicken: He is 
‘the Way, the Truth, the Life’ (John 
xiv. 6). It follows that the efficacy of 
His work for the individual depends 
upon fellowship with Him. See Ad- 
ditional Note. 

Qui per humanitatem interpellat 
pro nobis apud Patrem idem per di- 
vinitatem propitiatur nobis cum Patre 
(Bede ad loc.). 

περὶ τῶν ἅμ. ἡ. pro peccatis nos- 
tris V., peccatorum nostrorum Aug., 
for our sins. The privilege of Chris- 
tians (ἡμῶν) is noticed first. And it 
is natural that in the first case the 
stress is laid on ‘sins’ (περὶ τῶν ἅμ. 
ἡμῶν) and in the second case on ‘our’ 
(περὶ τῶν ἡμετέρων). 

The propitiation of Christ is here 
described as being ‘for,’ ‘in the mat- 
ter of (περί) our sins’ (comp. by 183), 
and not as ‘in behalf of us’ (ὑπὲρ 
ἡμῶν). On the phrases περὶ (ὑπὲρ) 
ἁμαρτίας (dv) see Hebr. xiii. 11 
note. 

οὐ π. «. ἡ. δέ] The particle (δέ) marks 
the clause as guarding against error, 
not merely adding a new thought. 

περὶ ὅλου τοῦ κόσμου] pro totius 
mundi [86. peccatis] V., (sed et) totius 
mundi Aug., for the whole world. 
The variation in the construction (for 
our sins...for the whole world) is full 
of meaning (comp. Heb. ix. 7), Chris- 
tians as such are holy but still not 


II. 3] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 45 


3K, \ ? , ΄ « 5) t 2 / aN 
αι εν TOUTW γινώσκομεν OTL EYVWKAMEY aUTOV, EaV 


3 Aug. reads simply et in hoc cognoscimus eum. 


unstained by sins contracted ‘in the 
walk of life’ (John xiii. 10); the 
world, all outside the Church, as such 
is sinful (c. v. 19). But for all alike 
Christ’s propitiation is valid. The 
propitiation extends as far as the 
need of it (Zc.), through all place and 
all time. Comp. iv. 14 (John iv. 42; 
xii. 32; xvii. 22—24). 

The supposition that περὶ ὅλου τοῦ 
κόσμου is an elliptical expression for 
περὶ τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν ὅλου τοῦ κόσμου 
(so Latt.) is not justified by usage, and 
weakens the force of the passage. Con- 
trast Hebr. vii. 27. 

Philo in a noble passage (de Mon- 
arch, ii. 6, ii. p. 227 M.) contrasts 
the special offerings of other forms of 
worship with the universal intercession 
of the Jewish High-priest: ὁ τῶν Ἰου- 
δαίων ἀρχιερεὺς οὐ μόνον ὑπὲρ ἅπαντος 
ἀνθρώπων γένους ἀλλὰ καὶ ὑπὲρ τῶν τῆς 
φύσεως μερῶν, γῆς ὕδατος ἀέρος καὶ 
πυρός, τάς τε εὐχὰς καὶ τὰς εὐχαριστίας 
ποιεῖται, τὸν κόσμον, ὅπερ ἐστὶ ταῖς 
ἀληθείαις, πατρίδα εἶναι ἑαυτοῦ νομίζων, 
ὑπὲρ ἧς ἱκεσίαις καὶ λιταῖς εἴωθεν ἐξευ- 
μενίζειν τὸν ἡγεμόνα ποτνιώμενος τῆς 
ἐπιεικοῦς καὶ ἵλεω φύσεως αὑτοῦ μετα- 
διδόναι τῷ γενομένῳ. 

Comp. 1 Clem. R. ὁ. 7 ἀτενίσωμεν 
els TO αἷμα τοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ ἴδωμεν ὡς 
ἔστιν τίμιον τῷ θεῷ καὶ πατρὶ αὐτοῦ, ὅτι 
διὰ τὴν ἡμετέραν σωτηρίαν ἐκχυθὲν παντὶ 
τῷ κόσμῳ μετανοίας χάριν ὑπήνεγκεν. 


2. The signs of the personal efficacy 
of the divine remedy for sin 
(ii. 3—6). 

3 And in this we perceive that we 
know him, if we observe his com- 
mandments. *He that saith I know 
him and observeth not his command- 
ments, is a liar, and in this man the 
truth is not; *but whosoever obserceth 
his word, verily in this man the love 
of God hath been perfected. 


φυλάξωμεν (for τηρῶμεν) δὲ". 


The first two verses of the chapter 
declare thenature of the divine remedy 
for sin; in these next four St John 
indicates the sign of its personal effi- 
cacy. The sign is twofold, and corre- 
sponds with two aspects of the spi- 
ritual life ; there is the sign of know- 
ledge (vv. 3—5 a); and there is the 
sign of union (vv. 5 ὦ, 6). The sign of 
knowledge is (shortly) obedience; and 
the sign of union is imitation. 

3. The new form of false doctrine 
which St John meets corresponds with 
and grows out of the first of those 
which he has already analysed. Some 
claimed a knowledge of God, as some 
claimed fellowship with God (i. 6), ir- 
respective ofa Christ-like life. Kuow- 
ledge no less than fellowship involves 
real likeness (comp. John viii. 32; 
ο. iii. 7). 

vo. 3—5a. The sign of knowledge. 
The sign of knowledge is developed 
characteristically by the Apostle. He 
first states generally that it lies in 
obedience (v. 3), and then follows out 
this statement further negatively and 
positively, shewing the issues of the 
want of obedience (v. 4), and of the 
activity of obedience (Ὁ. 5 a). 

3. Under one aspect this verse is 
connected with i. 5. But between the 
declaration of God’s nature and man’s 
knowledge of Him there comes in the 
episode of sin. This fatal interrup- 
tion breaks the natural development 
of thought. The connexion of i. 1, 3, 
5 (καί), ii. 3 (καί), corresponds with 
that of John i. 1, 14. 

ἐν τούτῳ γινώσκομεν in hoc scimus 
V., in hoc cognoscimus Aug., in this 
we perceive. The phrase ‘in this’ is 
characteristic of the Epistle and oc- 
curs with slight variations of form. 

(1) In this (ἐν τούτῳ) we perceive 
(γινώσκομεν) : ti. 55 ili, 245 iv. 13 ; 
γ. 2 and so also ‘in this we know 


46 


(ἐγνώκαμεν)᾽ iii, 16; and ‘in this we 
shall know (yvacopeba)’ iii, 19; and 
‘in this ye perceive (ywookere)’ iv. 2. 
Comp. John xiii. 35 (xv. 8; xvi. 30). 

(2) From this (ἐκ τούτου) we per- 
ceive : iv. 6. 

(3) Whence (ὅθεν) we perceive: 
ii. 18. 

Generally ‘this’ (rovro) marks some- 
thing which has been already express- 
ed, though it is further developed in 
what follows (comp. ¢.g. διὰ τοῦτο... 
ὅτι, 111. 1; John v. 16, 18; vi. 65; 
viii. 47; x. 17; xii. 18; xvi. 15). But 
here the reference appears to be to 
that which is clearly apprehended in 
the mind of the Apostle and present 
to him, though it has not yet been 
brought forward ; in this..namely if 

Perhaps however even here the 
‘this’ really rests upon the whole 
relation of the Christian to Christ 
which is implied in ev. 1, 2. That 
relation furnishes the test of know- 
ledge ; if the relation be vital it will 
include obedience. Comp. Ὁ. 2. 

The experience to which the A- 
postle appeals here and in the pa- 
rallel passages (γινώσκομεν) is present 
and immediate, confirmed from mo- 
ment to moment in the actual course 
of life. So far it is distinguished 
from the knowledge of an absolute 
fact (οἴδαμεν, 111. 2, note). 

eyvdxapev...] cognovimus V., know 
Him, or more exactly, have come toa 
knowledge of Him. Knowledge of a 
person involves sympathy (6. iii. 1 n.); 
and in this particular case includes 
the striving after conformity with 
Him who is known. To know God as 
God is to be in vital fellowship with 
Him, to love Him, to fulfil that rela- 
tion towards Him for which we are 
born. And conversely to be known 
by God, to be the object of His know- 
ledge, is to be in harmony with Him. 
Comp. Gal. iv. 9; 1 Cor. viii. 2; xiii. 
12; John x. 14 ἢ; and negatively 
Matt. vii. 23; 2 Cor. v. 21. 

This knowledge of God gained by 
experience (γινώσκειν), and 80 contrast- 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[II. 3 


ed with the knowledge which is imme- 
diate and absolute (οἶδα), is presented 
in its different stages in the Gospel and 
Fpistles of St John. It is regarded 

(1) In reference to the point of 
acquisition (ἔγνων John 1. 10; x. 38; 
Xvi. 3; Xvil. 8, 25; ὁ. iii. 1; iv. 8). 

(2) Asa result of the past realised 
in the present (ἔγνωκα, John viii. 55; 
Xiv.9; xvii.7; ve. 4, 13, 14; lil 6, 16; 
2 John 1). And 

(3) As being actually realised at 
the moment (γινώσκω, John viii. 43; 
x. I4f., 27, 38; xiv. 7, 17; xvii. 3, 23; 
ο. iv. 2, 6, 7; ν. 20). 

These three aspects of the know- 
ledge of God offer a view of the begin- 
ning, the strength and the aim of life. 

It is worthy of remark that St John 
nowhere uses γνῶσις (St Luke, St 
Paul, St Peter), nor the compound 
forms ἐπιγνώσκειν (Synn., Acts, St 
Paul, 2 Peter), ἐπίγνωσις (St Paul, 
Heb., 2 Peter). He contines himself, 
as he does almost exclusively in deal- 
ing with faith (πιστεύειν εἰς), to the 
simple verb. This form of expression 
brings out most distinctly the per- 
sonal character of the energy. 

In this context it is not clearly de- 
fined to Whom the pronoun (éy». av- 
τόν) refers. The Divine Being fills 
the apostle’s vision, but the Person 
is not distinctly named. It has been 
supposed that the reference is to 
Christ, the main subject of the pre- 
ceding verses. In favour of this view 
it is urged that in i. 6 f£ the αὐτοῦ 
refers to the last subject of i. 5, and 
that the construction of this section is 
similar ; that the occurrence of the 
phrase the love of God in δ. 5 implies 
a reference of the preceding αὐτοῦ to 
the Son and not to the Father; that 
Christ Himself speaks of the ‘ keep- 
ing of His Commandments’ as the 
proof of love (John xiv. 15, &c.). On 
the other hand it is said that in this 
Epistle ‘the Commandments’ referred 
to are always the Commandments of 
God (i.e. the Father) as iii. 22, 24; v. 
2, 3; and that God is the great under- 


II. 4, 5] 


A A ΄ ΄- 
τὰς ἐντολὰς αὐτοῦ τηρώμεν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


47 


΄ ef Uy 
46 λέγων ὅτι "EyvwKxa 


» / ΕἸ \ ᾽ \ 7 fol A oe ΙΑ 
αὐτὸν καὶ τὰς ἐντολας αὐτοῦ μὴ τηρῶν ψεύστης 


᾽ ἕ A > 4 * 2 7 > ot 5s ᾽ "» ΄ 
ἐστίν, καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἡ ἀλήθεια οὐκ ἔστιν: "ὃς δ᾽ ἀν τηρῆ 
᾿ 


4. ὁ λέγων ὅτι NAB 5γιγ: -- ὅτι OC. 
ἡ ad. +700 Θεοῦ δὰ. 


lying subject of all, the ‘He’ (αὐτός) 
which is self-defined ; so that in point 
of fact αὐτός generally refers to ‘ God, 
while ἐκεῖνος always refers to Christ 
(v. 6 note). 

The sense remains substantially the 
same in both cases. It is in the Son 
that the Father is known (John xiv. 
9). And perhaps it is best to suppose 
that St John assumes a general ante- 
cedent ‘Him to whom we turn as 
God’ without special distinction of 
Persons. In other places he does not 
seem to draw any sharp distinction 
between the Father and the Son, but 
in the One God looks now to the reve- 
lation of the Father in the Son and 
now to the revelation of the Son 
(comp. iii. I—3, 5, 6: v. 20). 

ἐάν.. .τηρῶμεν] si observemus V., si 
servacerimus Aug., if we keep His 
commandments. Comp. Ὁ. 4; ili. 22, 
24; Vv. 3; John xiv. 15, 21; xv. 10; 
Apoc. xii. 17; xiv. 12. The phrase 
(τηρεῖν τὰς ἐντολάς) is only found else- 
where in New Testament in Matt. 
xix. 17; 1 Tim. vi. 14 (τηρεῖν τὴν ἐντ.). 
Comp. 1 Cor. vii. 19. It appears to 
be distinguished from the phrase 
which follows ‘keep His word’ as 
being an observance of definite in- 
structions, while that is the observance 
of a principle which is ever taking a 
new embodiment in the very process 
of life. 

. The phrase ποιεῖν ras ἐντολάς, which 
is found in the common text of Apoc. 
xxii. 14, is a false reading. 

The idea of τηρεῖν, as distinguished 
from φυλάσσειν in this connexion 
(John xiii 47; Matt. xix. 20; Luke 
xi. 28), appears. to be that of watchful 
heed to an object which claims, so to 
speak, a living observance, a service 


- καὶ’ ἐν τ. A, -év τούτῳ τὰ: 


not of the letter but of the spirit. 
A definite, unchangeable, deposit is 
‘guarded’ (φυλάσσεται, 1 Tim. vi. 20): 
a vital, growing, word is ‘ observed’ 
(mmpetra, John xiv. 22). The two 
verbs occur in juxtaposition in John 
xvii. 12 (note). 

4. ὁ λέγων] He that saith. This in- 
dividualising of the statement stands 
in contrast with the comprehensive 
form cited before Jf we say (i. 6, 8, 
10) and that used in Ὁ. 5. It occurs 
again vv. 6,9. The clause is an in- 
teresting example of a compound sub- 
ject ὁ [λέγων ὅτι... .καὶ...μὴ τηρῶν]. 

ἔγνωκα αὐτόν] sé nosse eum V., 
quia cognovit (cognort) eum Aug., I 
know Him. The direct personal as- 
sertion (ὁ λέγων ὅτι) is bolder jn form 
than the oblique construction in vv. 
6, 9 (ὁ λέγων μένειν, εἶναι). Comp. 
Hos. viii. 2. 

In the words which follow St John 
significantly takes up again phrases 
which he has used already in connexion 
with the three false pleas in regard 
to sin [ψεύστης ἐστίν || ψευδόμεθα i. 6; 
ἐν τούτῳ ἡ GA. οὐκ ἔστιν || ἡ GA. οὐκ 
ἔστιν ἐν ἡμῖν v. 8; (ὃς δ᾽ ἂν τηρῇ) αὐτοῦ 
τὸν λόγον || ὁ λόγος αὐτοῦ (οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν 
ἡμῖν) Ὁ. 10]. 

ψεύστης... ἐν τούτῳ...] aliar...in this 
man.... The whole character is false. 
See i. το note. The clause is very 
similar to i. 6 ὃ, but differs from it in 
being general while that is special. 
Here we have two characteristics of a 
permanent state (is a liar, the truth 
is not in him), and there two separate 
manifestations of the state (we lie, we 
do not the truth). 

ἐν τούτῳ... οὐκ ἔστιν] in him the 
truth is not. Or more literally in 
this man thus definitely characterised 


48 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[II. 5 


, ~ \ ,ὔ x ~ ᾽ἅ a ς ᾿ 4 ΄σ 6 ΄σ 
αὐτοῦ Tov λογον, ἀληθῶς ἐν τούτῳ ἡ ayann τοὺ θεοῦ 


and brought before us. See v. 5. 
This use of the demonstrative pro- 
noun is characteristic of St John (John 
y. 38; i. 2 note); and the emphatic 
order adds to its force. 

The truth is said to be in a man 
as an active principle within him re- 
gulating his thoughts and judgments 
(c. i. 8; John viii. 44; comp. John 
viii. 32); and again a man is said to 
be in the truth, as the sphere in which 
he moves (2 John 4; 3 John 3, 4; 
John viii. 44; comp. John xvii. 17). 

5. ὃς δ᾽ ἂν τηρῇ.-..] qui autem sercat 
V., qui a. servaverit Aug., but who- 
soever keepeth. The indefinite form 
(iii. 17; iv. 15) marks the breadth of 
the assertion. The Apostle does not 
here, as before and after, either single 
out a special example (ὁ λέγων, v. 4), 
or join himself with others (ἐὰν εἴπω- 
μεν, i. 6). He makes the statement 
in the most general terms. 

It will be noticed that the opposite 
to the vain assertions of false claimants 
to the Christian name is not given in 
a counter assertion but, as always, in 
action (i. 7 if we walk; i. 9 if we 
confess ; v. 10 he that loveth). 

τηρῇ αὐτοῦ τὸν λόγον] keepeth his 
word. The phrase expresses not 
only the fulfilment of specific injunc- 
tions (keep His commandments, v. 3) 
but also the heedful regard to the 
whole revelation made by Christ as a 
living and active power, of which the 
voice is never silent. The unity of the 
many ‘commandments’ is not in a 
‘law’ but in a ‘word’: it answers to 
the spirit and not to the letter. Comp. 
John viii. 51 f., 55; xiv. 23; xv. 20; 
xvii. 6. The passage John xiv.21—24 
is of singular interest as illustrating 
the full meaning of the phrase. 

The position of the pronoun here 
(αὐτοῦ τὸν λόγον), as contrasted with 
that which it has in Ὁ. 3 (ras ἐντολὰς 
αὐτοῦ), emphasises the personal idea. 
The main thought is that the word is 
His word, the word of God. There is 


emphasis also on the ‘keeping’ os δ᾽ 
ἂν τηρῇ contrasted with 6...ras évr. 
μὴ τηρῶν). 

ἀληθῶς ἐν τούτῳ] δογίέψ in him, in 
this man, Ὁ. 4 note. 

In the description of the state of 
the watchful believer the form of 
expression is changed significantly. 
St John does not say of him (συ. 4) 
that ‘he is true and the truth is 
in him’; but he rather regards his 
character from the divine side, and 
points out not what such a man is, but 
what such a man has received from 
Him who is unchangeable: in this 
man. the love of God hath been per- 
fected. By doing this he passes at 
the same time from that which may 
be a part of life to the fulness of life. 
Truth may be only a right concep- 
tion realised in thought: love is the 
Truth realised in a personal relation. 
The love which God gives (iii. 1) be- 
comes an active, divine power in the 
man who welcomes it. 

ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ θεοῦ] caritas Dei V., 
dilectio Det Aug., the love of God. 
The phrase, which occurs in the Epi- 
stle first here and henceforth through- 
out it, is ambiguous and may mean, 
according as the gen. is taken subj. or 
obj., either (1) the love which God 
shews, or (2) the love of which God is 
the object. It may also mean more 
generally (3) the love which is charac- 
teristic of God whether it is regarded 
as shewn by God or by man through 
His help. Generally the genitive 
after ἀγάπη in the N. T. is sedj., and 
defines those who feel or shew love: 
1 Thess. iii. 6; 2 Thess. i. 3; Phil i. 
9; Col. i. 8; Philem. 5, 7; Apoc. ii. 
4, 19. Once it marks the object of 
love: 2 Thess. ii, τὸ ἡ dy. τῆς ἀλη- 
θείας. But the object is more com- 
monly expressed by e’s: 1 Thess. iii. 
12; Col. i. 4; 1 Pet. iv. 8. Comp. 
Ign. Mart. 1; (Clem. R.] fragm. 1 
(Jacobson). 

In St Paul ‘the love of God, with 


II. 5] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


49 


λ ΄, 7E , , 74 5] 2 m”~ 2 “ 
τετελείωται. Vv TOUTW γινώσκομεν OTL EV auTw ἐσμεν" 


ἃ , ἐξ - ᾿ Bi ὩΣ Δὲ a a8 
5 ἐν τούτῳ.. ἐσμέν: Aug. reads in hoc cognoscimus quia in ipso sumus si in 


ipso perfecti fuerimus. 


the doubtful exception of 2 Thess. iii. 
5, always means the love which is 
shewn by God, which comes from 
God : 2 Cor. xiii. 13 ; Rom. v. 5 ; viii 
39; Eph. ii. 4; and so also ‘the love 
of Christ’ isthe love which Christ has 
shewn and shews : 2 Cor. v. 14; Rom. 
vii. 35 ; Eph. iii. το. Comp. Ign. ad 
Trall. 6; ad Rom. inscr. In like 
manner ‘ the love of the Spirit’ (Rom. 
xv. 30) is that love which the Spirit 
kindles and sustains. The phrase ‘ the 
love of God’ does not occur in the Lxx. 

The usage of St John is less simple 
than that of St Paul. In 1 John iv. 
9 ‘the love af God’ is evidently the 
love which God has shewn (comp... v, 
9 ἡ μαρτυρία τοῦ θεοῦ), and this love 
is declared to be the spring of all 
love. ‘His love’ (v. 12) becomes 
effective in man. This conception of 
the love of God as communicated by 
God to man is plainly expressed in 1 
John iii. 1 the Father hath given to 
us love (comp. ὁ. iv. 7, 16). Love such 
as God Himself feels—‘ divine love’— 
becomes therefore an endowment of 
the Christian. In this sense ‘the 
love of God’ in the believer calls for 
deeds of love to the brethren (6. iii. 
17). At the same time God is Him- 
self the object of the love of which He 
is the source and the rule: c v. 3 
(comp. John xiv. 15, 31); ii. 15 (ἡ ay. 
τοῦ πατρός). 

It appears therefore most probable 
that the fundamental idea of ‘ the love 
of God’ in St John is ‘ the love which 
God has made known, and which an- 
swers to His nature. This love 
communicated to man is effective in 
him towards the brethren and to- 
wards God Himself. But however 
it may be manifested the essential 
conception that it is a love divine in 
its origin and character is not lost. 
Comp. John xv. 9 f. 


W. J. 


According to this interpretation 
the phrase corresponds with the 
‘righteousness of God’ (Rom. i. 17, 
&c.), the ‘ peace of God’ (Phil. iv. 7). 

The phrase occurs twice only in the 
Gospels : Luke xi. 42 ; John v. 42. In 
each case the rendering ‘love to God’ 
is admissible, but this rendering does 
not seem to exhaust the meaning 
(comp. Clem. R. 1 Cor. 49). 

In the present passage there can be 
little doubt that c. iv. 9 defines the 
meaning. ‘The love of God’ is God’s 
love towards man welcomed and ap- 
propriated by man. The thought of 
action is throughout connected with 
the thought of what God has done. 
The Christian ‘knows the love of 
God’ and it becomes in him a spring 
of love, attaining its complete deve- 
lopment in human life through vital 
obedience. 

On the use of ἀγάπη by St John 
see additional note on c. iii. 16. 

ἀληθῶς) vere V., verily, in very 
truth, and not in word only (c. iii. 18). 
Comp. John i. 47 (48); viii. 31. The 
word qualifies the whole clause which 
follows. This practical result is con- 
trasted by implication with the idle 
assertions of false Christians. 

The perfection of love is condi- 
tioned by the completeness of obe- 
dience. 

τετελείωται] perfecta est V., con- 
summata est Lucf., hath been per- 
Jected. Comp. c. iv. 12 (note), 17, 18 
where the thought is presented in 
different lights. Comp. Clem. R. 1 
Cor. 50 of ἐν ἀγάπῃ τελειωθέντες. 
Doctr. Apost. x. § μνήσθητι, κύριε, τῆς 
ἐκκλησίας σου...τελειῶσαι αὐτὴν ἐν τῇ 
ἀγάπῃ σου. The potential fulfilment 
of the love of God in the Christian 
lies in his absolute readiness to learn 
and to do God’s will (comp. Rom. siii. 
10). Each Christian according to his 


4 


50 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IL. 6 


δὲ λέ : ἡτῷ μέ PEt ὃς ἐκεῖνος περιε- 
ὁ λέγων ἐν αὐτῷ μένειν ὀφείλει καθὼς ἐκεῖ ρ 


‘ ΄ 
πάτησεν καὶ αὐτὸς περιπατεῖν. 


6 καὶ αὐτὸς περιπ. AB vg the: καὶ αὖτ. τ οὕτως' περιπ. SNC me syr hel. 


measure is perfected as ἃ member of 
Christ (Eph. iv. 16). He receives 
from Christ what Christ has Himself 
received. Comp. John xvii.25 f On 
this idea of ‘perfection, ‘consumma- 
tion,’ see Heb. ii. 10; ix. 9; xii 23 and 
notes. Contrast τελεῖται 2 Cor. xii. 9. 

Both τελειοῦν and ἐπιτελεῖν are used 
of Christian action (Phil. iii. 12; Gal. 
iii. 3). But in τελειοῦν there is the 
idea of a continuous growth, a vital 
development, an advance to maturity 
(τελειότης, Heb. v. 13; vi. 1. In 
ἐπιτελεῖν the notion is rather that of 
attaining a definite end (τέλος). Con- 
trast James ii. 22 ἐκ τῶν ἔργων ἡ πίσ- 
τις ἐτελειώθη With 2 Cor. vii. 1 ἐπιτε- 
λοῦντες ἁγιωσύνην, and Acts xx. 24 
τελειῶσαι τὸν δρόμον with 2 Tim. iv. 7 
τὸν δρόμον τετέλεκα. In 2 Cor. xii. 9 
τελειοῦται has been substituted in 
later authorities for τελεῖται. 

v.5 6,6. The sign of union. The 
sign of union with God is found in 
the imitation of Christ. As the sign 
of knowledge is to be seen in the 
keeping of the divine commandments 
in their unity (v. 3) and in the keep- 
ing of the divine word in its unity 
(Ὁ. 5), so the sign of fellowship is to 
be seen in the copying the divine life. 

In this we perceive that we are in 
him: he that saith he abideth in 
him, ought himself also to walk even 
as he walked. 

Ἐν τούτῳ] Hereby, in this, in the 
realisation of this spirit of obedience 
which is the gift of love: τ. 3 note. 

γινώσκομεν] Comp. δ. 3; 6. v. 2 notes. 

ἐν αὐτῷ ἐσμέν] are in him. The 
idea finds a full expression in Acts 
xvii. 28 ἐν αὐτῷ ζῶμεν καὶ κινούμεθα 
καὶ ἐσμέν. It is prominent in St John’s 
writings in its spiritual form, and is 
presented under several different as- 
pects. The fellowship of believers 


with God is accomplished in Christ 
(John xiv. 20; xvii. 21, 23). They 
have in Him the unity and founda- 
tion of their being, even as ‘the 
world’ ‘lies in the evil one’ (6. v. 
19 f.). The connexion finds a twofold 
fulfilment in ‘heaven’ and on ‘earth,’ 
‘we in Him and He in us’ (iv. 15 
note). 

For the phrase ‘being in God’ St 
John more commonly, as in the fol- 
lowing clause, uses the phrase ‘ abid- 
ing in God,’ which adds the concep- 
tion of personal determination and 
effort : cv. 24, 27, 28; iii. 6, 24; iv. 
12f.;15 f John vi. 56 note; xv.4 ff. 

Thus there is a progressive close- 
ness of relation in the three phrases 
used in this section : ἐγνωκέναι αὐτόν, 
εἶναι ἐν αὐτῷ, μένειν ἐν αὐτῷ (‘ cognitio, 
communio, constantia,’ Bengel). 

6. ὁ λέγων] he that saith. υ. 4. 
The open, personal profession carries 
with it a paramount obligation. 

ἐν αὐτῷ μένειν] Ὁ. 5 note. 

The construction of λέγω with the 
infin. occurs again in Ὁ. 9. Comp. 
2 Tim. ii, 18; and ὁ. 4 note. 

ὀφείλει) debet V., ought, is bound. 
The obligation is represented as a 
debt (Luke xvii. 10). The life which 
is from God and in God must be 
manifested after the pattern of the 
divine life which has been shewn 
upon earth. As contrasted with δεῖ, 
an obligation in the nature of things 
(John xx. 9), which is not found in 
the Epistles of St John, though it is 
not unfrequent in the Gospel (c. iii. 
14 note) and the Apocalypse, ὀφείλειν 
expresses a special, personal obli- 
gation. 

Comp. ¢. iii. 16; iv. 11; 3 John 8; 
Hebr. ii. 17 note. 

The image is frequent in St Paul. 
Comp. Rom. i. 14; Gal. v. 3. 


ΤΙ. 6] 


καθὼς ἐκεῖνος] even as he, i.e. Christ. 
The pronoun ἐκεῖνος occurs iii. 3, 5, 7, 
16; iv. 17, and is always used of 
Christ. He stands out as the one 
figure seen in full perfection of His 
humanity. Comp. John i. 18; 2 Tim. 
ii. 13. For the omission of οὕτως see 
6. iv. 17 note. 

mepieratnoev| walked, i. 6 note. 
Even in the contemplation of the 
loftiest thoughts St John fixes a 
practical standard. The divine fel- 
lowship to which he points is realised 
on earth in corresponding action. 

The pattern of Christ, as set before 
us in the New Testament, is in every 
case a pattern of humiliation, suffer- 
ing, sacrifice. Comp. Matt. xi. 29; 
John xiii. 15; Rom. xv. 2 f£.; Eph. v. 
1 ff; Phil. ii, 5 fh; 1 Pet. ii 21; 
Heb. sii. 2. 

Augustine points out that ‘walking’ 
may be ‘bearing’ only: [Christus] 
fixus in cruce erat et in ipsa via am- 
bulabat : ipsa est via caritatis. 


111. ΟΒΕΒΡΤΙΕΝΟΕ IN LOVE AND LIGHT 
IN ACTUAL LIFE (ii. 7—11). 


The declaration of the test of know- 
ledge of God and fellowship with God, 
which St John has given in vv. 3—6, 
leads to a view of the practical fulfil- 
ment of the test indicated already in 
o.6. The Life of Christ, a Life of com- 
plete love, of complete self-sacrifice, is 
the type of the Christian’s Life; and 
the significance of Christ’s Life in 
this aspect is gathered up in the 
one commandment of love, which ex- 
presses what is meant by ‘keeping 
His commandments’ (v. 3) and ‘walk- 
ing even as He walked’ (v. 6). This 
commandment is first set forth in its 
twofold character as old and yet new 
(ve. 7, 8); and then traced out in its 
issues (ov. 9---Ἰ 1). 

1. The Commandment old and 
new (ii. 7, 8). 

The commandment, which is the 
rule of the Christian Life, is as old as 
the first message of the Gospel and 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 51 


yet as new as the latest realisation of 
its power. It lies included in what 
we first hear, and is illuminated by 
the growing experience of life. 

7Beloved, tt 1s no new command- 
ment I write to you, but an old com- 
mandment which ye had from the 
beginning: the commandment, the 
old commandment, ts the word which 
ye heard. 

SAgain, a new commandment I 
write to you, even that which is true. 
in him and in you, because the dark- 
ness is passing away and the light, 
the true light, already shineth. 

The ‘commandment’ to which the 
Apostle refers has not been formally 
stated, but it is implied in the ‘ought’ 
(‘is bound’ o@eiAcc) of v. 6. The idea 
of the imitation of Christ is identical 
with the fulfilment of love. And the 
word ὀφείλει carries us back to the 
Lord’s interpretation of His example: 
John xiii. 14 (ὑμεῖς ὀφείλετε). We 
have already seen that the many 
‘commandments’ (v. 3) are included 
in ‘the word’ (v. 5). Now the ‘com- 
mandments’ are summed up in the 
one ‘commandment’ (John xiii. 34; 
comp. ¢. iii. 22 f.). 

This commandment is spoken of as 
‘not new but old.’ In this connexion 
‘old’ may mean either (1) old rela- 
tively: one which belonged to the 
first stage of the Christian Church, 
while perhaps as yet it was unsepa- 
rated from the old order: one of 
which believers had been in possession 
Jrom the beginning, from the first 
origin of their faith; or (2) old abso- 
lutely: one which was included in the 
very constitution of man from the 
beginning: one which the Jew had 
recognised in the injunctions of the 
Law, and the Gentile in the prompt- 
ings of his heart. 

The clause which immediately fol- 
lows, and the identification of the 
commandment with ‘the word’ which 
the disciples heard, seem to deter- 
mine that the first sense is undoubt- 
edly right. 


4—2 


52 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[1.7 


Τ᾿ λγαπητοί, οὐκ ἐντολὴν καινὴν γράφω ὑμῖν, ἀλλ’ 


᾽ \ » aA tf $i 4 ᾽ i Ue 
ἐντολήν παλαιαν ny εἴχετε απ ἀρχῆς 


ἡ ἐντολὴ ἢ 


7 ἀγαπητοί SABC vg the me syrr: ἀδελφοί ς΄. 


7. ᾿Αγαπητοί] Carissimi V., Dilec- 
tissimi Aug., Beloved. This is the first 
occurrence of the title. It is sug- 
gested by the thought of the last few 
verses, just as the paternal address 
My litile children (v. 1) was sug- 
gested by i. 10. The love of God and 
the love of Christ calling out man’s 
love presents Christians in their new 
relation one to another. St John 
while enforcing the commandment of 
love gives expression to love. Comp. 
iii, 2, 21; iv. I, 7 note, 11; and in 
the sing. 3 John 2, 5, 11. In each 
case the use of the title illustrates the 
apostle’s thought. So also the title 
ἀδελφοί brings out the point of his 
teaching in the one place where he 
adopts it: iii. 13. Comp. Hebr.vi. 9 note. 

With ἀγαπητοί contrast ἠγαπημένοι 
Col. iii. 12; 1 Thess. i. 4; 2 Thess. ii. 
13. Comp. Eph. i. 6. 

οὐκ évr. κι γ.] Comp. 2 John 5 οὐχ 
ὡς ἐντ. γράφων σοι k. 

ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς] ab initio V., from the 
beginning. The words are, as has 
been already indicated, ambiguous. 
The phrase is used both absolutely 
and relatively. 

1. It is used absolutely: ο. iii. 8 
dw ἀρχῆς ὁ διάβολος ἁμαρτάνει, when 
first the present order of being is 
disclosed. 

00. 13, 14 6 ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς. 

6. i. 1 ὃ ἦν ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς. 

Matt. xix. 4, ὃ ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς. || Me. x. 6 
ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς κτίσεως. 2 Pet. iii. 4. 

2. Again it is used relatively in 
different connexions: 

John xv. 27 ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ 
ἐστέ, from the beginning of my public 
ministry. Comp. ἐξ ἀρχῆς John vi. 64, 
xvi. 4; Acts xxvi. 4 τὴν ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς 
γενομένην [βίωσιν] from the beginning 
of my life. 


Luke i. 2 οἱ ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς αὐτοπταί. 
Comp. Acts i. 22. 

Ὁ. ii. 24 ὃ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς ἠκούσατε, from 
the beginning of your Christian faith. 
Comp. ὁ. iii. 11; 2 John 6. 

These last passages, whichareclosely 
parallel, decide that the reference here 
is to the beginning of the Christian 
faith of the readers. 

Comp. Is. xiii. 16 (LXx.). 

The article is omitted as in the cor- 
responding phrases ἀπὸ καταβολῆς 
κόσμου, πρὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου. See 
c. i. τ note. 

ἡ ἐντολὴ... ἠκούσατε] the command- 
ment, the commandment of which I 
speak, the old commandment, zs the 
word which ye heard. The form of 
expression used emphasises the two 
thoughts which have gone before (the 
commandment, the old command- 
ment). Comp. i. 2, ii. 25 ἡ ζωὴ ἡ αἰώνιος 
(the life, the eternal life); i. 3 ἡ κοινω- 
via ἡ ἡμετέρα (the fellowship of which 
I speak, the fellowship which is our 
blessing); Ὁ. 8 τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν; iv. 
9 ὁ υἱὸς ὁ μονογενής: 2 John 11 τοῖς 
ἔργοις αὐτοῦ τοῖς πονηροῖς: 13 τῆς ddeA- 
φῆς σου τῆς ἐκλεκτῆς. 

‘On the other hand St John writes 
Ὁ. iv. 18 ἡ τελεία ἀγάπη: 3 John 4 τὰ 
ἐμὰ τέκνα. 

ὁ λόγος] The old commandment, 
the commandment of love, was in- 
cluded in the ‘Gospel’ which the 
apostles proclaimed. The record of 
the Lord’s work, the word of life, was 
a continuous call to love. 

ὃν ἠκούσατε] which ye heard, Ὁ. 24, 
iii, 11. Contrast the perfect: i. 1, 3, 
5, iv. 3. The change of tenses in εἴχετε, 
ἠκούσατε, is significant. The com- 
mandment was a continuous power: 
the hearing of the word was at once 
final in its “obligation. 


ΤΙ. 8] 


yoy © ΄ “Δ > t 
παλαιὰ ἐστιν ὁ λογος ὃν ἠκούσατε. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 53 


> ‘ 
8 πάλιν ἐντολὴν 


\ ΄ con “» > \ > » κα V2 εκ 
Kalynv ypapw υμιν, O ἐστιν ἀληθὲς εν αὐτῷ και ἐν υμιν, 


ἠκούσατε NABC vg the me syrr: Ὁ ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς ς΄. 


ἐν αὐτῷ ad. A. 


8. πάλιν] tterum V., again. The 
Apostle has given one side of the 
Truth: he now turns to the other. 
The πάλιν answers exactly to our 
‘again’ when we enter on a new line 
of argument or reflection, starting 
afresh. Comp. John xvi. 28; 1 Cor. 
xii. 21; 2 Cor. x. 7; xi. 16. 

ἐντολὴν καινήν] mandatum novum 
V., @ new commandment. Comp. 
John xiii. 34. The commandment of 
love was new to the disciples who 
had followed Christ when He gave it 
them on the eve of the Passion in a 
new form and with a new sanction. 
It was new also to the believers whom 
St John addressed in proportion as 
they were now enabled to apprehend 
with fresh power the Person and Life 
of Christ. The ‘newness’ is relative 
to the position of those to whom St 
John writes. While life advances the 
Gospel must be alwaysnew. Contrast 
Hebr. viii. 13. 

6 ἐστιν ἀληθές... quod verum est... 
V., even that which ts true... The 
whole sentence admits of several dif- 
ferent translations: (1) As a new 
commandment I write unto you that 
which is true... (2) A new command- 
ment write I unto you, namely, that 
which is true... (3) A new command- 
ment write I unto you, a fact (i.e. 
that it is new as well as old) which is 
true... The symmetry of the struc- 
ture seems to be decisive against (1): 
᾿Ἐντολὴν καινὴν γράφω cannot but be 
strictly parallel to οὐκ ἐντολὴν καινὴν 
ypapo—‘a new commandment do I 
write,’ ‘not a new commandment do 
I write.” Itis more difficult to decide 
between (2) and (3). If (2) be taken 
the sense will be: ‘A new command- 
ment write I unto you, new no less 
than old, new in its shape and in its 


8 dd. καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ N: 


ev ὑμῖν NBC vg the me syrr: ἐν ἡμῖν A syr hel mg (lat). 


authority, even that which, while it was 
enjoined upon us from the first, has 
been found to correspond more closely 
than we then understood with the facts 
of Christ’s Life, with the crowning 
mystery of His Passion, and with the 
facts of the Christian life’ If on the 
other hand (3) be taken then we have 
this line of thought: ‘A new com- 
mandment write I unto you, new, I 
say, as well as old, an assertion which 
is proved true in Christ, so far as His 
works and words have become more 
fully known; and in you, so far as the 
actual experience of life has shewn 
this duty of love in a new light, 
more comprehensive and more con- 
straining.’ 

On the whole the second interpre- 
tation appears to fall in best with the 
context and with the reason which fol- 
lows (because...the true light already 
shineth). That which gave novelty to 
the commandment was found in the 
larger and deeper views of Christ’s 
Person and of the work of the Church 
which had been unfolded since ‘the 
beginning.’ Old words, St John could 
affirm, and appeal to his readers for 
the confirmation of the statement, had 
become new. Comp. 2 Cor. v. 17. 

ὅτι ἡ oxoria...] because the dark- 
ness...The Apostle justifies his paradox 
by calling attention to the change 
which had taken place in the face of 
the world since the Gospel was first 
preached. The outward establishment 
of the Church gave a clearer distinct- 
ness to the Christian character. It had 
become possible to point to that which 
was openly before men’s eyes. Atthe 
same time the Person of Christ Him- 
self, with its infinite significance, was 
illuminated by the experience of be- 
lievers. The meaning of ‘the word’ 


54 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[II. 8 


ε ‘ A \ - A ᾽ A yw 
ὅτι ἡ σκοτία παράγεται καὶ TO Pws TO ἀληθινὸν ἤδη 


σκιά A. 


(for example) was made clearer than 
before by the Gospel of St John as 
compared with the earlier Gospels. 

The clause may be taken as an ex- 
planation of the reason for which the 
Apostle is repeating the command, 
even that it was the ‘last hour.’ But 
this interpretation appears impro- 
bable. 

mapdyera...paiver] transierunt... 
lucet V., is passing away...already 
shineth. The change is pictured as 
n process. The darkness is being 
withdrawn (παράγεται) as a curtain 
from the face of the world, and the 
light is beginning (ἤδη) to have free 
course. 

For παράγεται see v. 17. The in- 
trans. παράγει occurs I Cor. vii. 31; 
Ps. exliv. (cxliii.) 4. The idea seems 
to be that God is removing the veil 
in order to lay open the better things 
which it conceals. 

τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν] verum lumen 
V., lux vera Aug., the light, the 
true light. The addition of the 
epithet ἀληθινόν (c. v. 20) which is 
found only here and John i. 9 (note) 
with φῶς, marks the light as that 
which fulfilled all that had been pro- 
mised by the preparatory, partial, 
even fictitious, lights which had ex- 
isted in the world before. If we en- 
deavour to fix the meaning of ‘the 
light’ here it can be best done by the 
help of the parallel John i. 9. Before 
the Incarnation ‘the Word, ‘the true 
Light’ was ever ‘coming into the 
world” Now by the mission of the 
Holy Spirit, sent in His name, He 
was shining with a steady beam. The 
darkness had not eclipsed it. In the 
Christian Society, seen in the midst 
of the world, there was an evident 
manifestation of the light defining the 
lines of Christian conduct. 

God ‘is light’ absolutely (i. 5): the 
revelation of God in Christ by the 


Spirit is ‘the light, the true light’ 
for men; and in His light the be- 
liever is enabled to see all things. 

φαίνει] lucet V., shineth. Comp. 
John i. 5 (note). The idea is of a 
luminary giving out its brightness: 
Apoc. i. 16, viii. 12, xxi. 23; 2 Pet. 
i. 19. 

For the image generally compare 
Rom. xiii. 11 ff; Tit. ii. τα, iii. 4. 


2. The issues of the command- 
ment of love (ii. 9—11). 


The fulfilment of the command- 
ment of love is regarded in its general 
nature (v. 9) and then more in detail 
in the effects of love and hatred (ez. 
10, 11). A state of love is the condi- 
tion of being in light; and this state 
carries with it a clear certainty of 
right action which is otherwise unob- 
tainable. Hatred on the other hand 
involves complete ignorance of the 
way and of the end of life. This must 
be so; for dwelling in darkness de- 
stroys the very power by which the 
light is discerned. 

9He that saith he ts in the light 
and hateth his brother is in the dark- 
ness until now. He that loveth his 
brother abideth in the light, and 
there is none occasion of stumbling 
in him; “but he that hateth his 
brother is in the darkness, and walk- 
eth in the darkness, and knoweth not 
whither he goeth, because the dark- 
ness hath blinded his eyes. 

9. The link of transition lies in the 
last words ofv.8. The thought of ‘the 
light already shining’ naturally sug- 
gests the question, Who then is in the 
light? St John’s account of the obli- 
gations and issues of love explains 
this and is an answer to the false 
claims of knowledge separated from 
the action which embodies it (comp. 
Ὁ. 4). 

Ὁ λέγων...} He that saith. v. 4. It 


11. 9] 


φαίνει. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 55 


€ / - > 
9Ὁ λέγων ἐν τῷ φωτὲ εἶναι καὶ TOV 


‘ co - “ 
ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ μισῶν ἐν τῇ σκοτίᾳ ἐστὶν ἕως ἄρτι. 
« 


9 μισῶν : -ἰ ψεύστης ἐστὶν καί 8 Cypr Lefr. 


is always easy to mistake an intel- 
lectual knowledge for a spiritual know- 
ledge of the Truth. Real knowledge 
involves, at least potentially, corre- 
sponding action. 

ἐν τῷ φωτὶ εἶναι] is in the light, 
surrounded, as it were, by an atmo- 
sphere of divine glory. Comp. i. 7 (iv. 
15 note). 

μισῶν... hateth.... Indifference is 
impossible. Comp. Luke xi. 23. There 
is no twilight in this spiritual world. 
‘The brother’ stands in a relation 
towards us which makes some feeling 
on our part inevitable. In such a case 
there is a simple choice between ‘for’ 
and ‘against,’ that is essentially be- 
tween ‘love’ and ‘hatred’ ‘Hatred’ 
is the expression of a want of sym- 
pathy. Where sympathy exists hatred 
is impossible (John vii. 7); where 
sympathy does not exist hatred is 
inevitable (John xv. 18 ff., xvii. 14, 
111. 20). 

There is however a certain ambiguity 
in the word ‘hate’ for it serves as the 
opposite both to the love of natural 
affection (φιλεῖν), and to the love of 
moral judgment (ἀγαπᾷν). In the 
former case ‘hatred,’ which may be- 
come a moral duty, involves the sub- 
jection of an instinct (John xii. 25, 
xv. 18 f.; comp. Luke xiv. 26); in 
the latter case ‘hatred’ expresses a 
‘general determination of character (c. 
iii. 15, iv. 20; comp. Matt. v. 43, vi. 
24; Eph. v. 28 f.). 

τὸν ἀδελφόν] his brother, that is, 
his fellow-Christian, and not more 
generally his fellow-man. It is only 
through the recognition of the re- 
lation to Christ that the wider relation 
is at last apprehended. The idea of 
brotherhood under the new dispensa- 
tion (comp. Acts ii. 37, iii. 17, vi. 3, 
ix. 30, &c.: Rom. i. 13, &c.) is nor- 


mally thus limited (yet see Acts xxii. 
I, xxviii 17; Rom. ix. 3). ‘Brethren’ 
are those who are united together in 
Christ to God as their Father (John 
EX. 17, xxi, 23; comp. Matt. xii. 50). 
The title occurs significantly in the 
first record of the action of the Church 
(Acts 1. 15 ἐν μέσῳ τῶν ἀδελφῶν; 
comp. ix. 30, &c.) and then throughout 
the apostolic writings (1 Thess. v. 26; 
Gal. i. 2; 1 Cor. v. 11; Rom. xvi. 14 
&c.; 1 Tim. vi. 2; Jamesi.g; 1 Pet. v. 
12 &.; 6. iii. 14, 16; 3 John 3, 5, 10). 

The singular is characteristic of this 
epistle (vv. 10, 11, iii, 10, 15, 17, iv. 
20 f,, ν. 16). Comp. Rom. xiv. το ff.; 
1 Cor. viii. 13. Compare Additional 
Note on ¢. iii. 14. 

There is, as far as it appears, no 
case where a fellow-man, as man, is 
called ‘a brother’ in the N, T. Such 
passages as Matt. v. 22 ff, Luke vi. 
41 ff, presuppose a special bond of 
‘brotherhood’ The ‘love of the 
brotherhood’ (piradeA Gia: 1 Thess. iv. 
9; Rom. xii. 10; Heb. xiii. 1; 1 Pet. 
i. 22 (iii. 8); 2 Pet. i. 7) leads up to 
‘love’ (ἀγάπη). But this widest love 
is expressly assigned in its full extent 
only to God (John iii. 16, c. iv. 10 f.). 

Augustine makes a striking appli- 
cation of the words to the Donatists: 
Offendit te nescio quis sive malus, 
sive ut tu putas malus, sive ut tu 
fingis malus, et deseris tot bonos? 
Qualis dilectio est fraterna? Qualis 
apparuit in istis [Donatistis]. Cum 
accusant Afros deseruerunt orbem 
terrarum. 

And again he points out the ground 
of the Christian’s love of enemies: Sic 
dilige inimicos ut fratres optes. Sic 
dilige inimicos ut in societatem tuam 
vocentur. Sic enim dilexit ille qui in 
cruce pendens ait Pater ignosce illis, 
quia nesciunt quid faciunt. 


56 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[II. 10, 11 


rn A ΄σ ΄ A lg 4 
το ἀγαπῶν τὸν ἀδελῴον αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ φωτὶ μένει, καὶ 
΄ at A ~ x ᾽ Ἂ, 
σκάνδαλον ἐν αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔστιν" “6 δὲ μισών τὸν ἀδελφὸν 
? - ΄σ \ A io / ~ 
αὐτοῦ ἐν TH σκοτίᾳ ἐστὶν καὶ EV TH σκοτίᾳ περιπατεῖ; 
a 


10 ἐν αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔστιν B vg: οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ NAC (me) the. 


ἐν τῇ ox. ἐστίν] is in the darkness. 
Comp. i. 6 note. The assertion is not 
simply characterised as false (i. 6 we 
lie) or as revealing a false nature (δ. 4 
he is a liar): it involves the existence 
of a moral state the exact opposite of 
that which is claimed. 

ἕως ἄρτι] usgue adhuc V., until 
now, though the light is actually 
shining, and he affirms that he is in 
it, yea even that he has been in it 

- from the first. 

10. ὁ ἀγαπῶν... He that loveth... 
The reality of the fact is set against 
the assertion in v. 9 (He that saith...). 
Comp. ev. 4, 5 note. 

ἐν τῷ φωτὶ μένει] abideth (and not 
simply zs as in ¢. 9) in the light. 
The idea of stability is added to that 
of simple ‘being’ (comp. tz. 5, 6). 
The position of the false brother and 
of the true brother is referred to the 
initial point of faith. Love testifies 
to the continuance of a divine fellow- 
ship on man’s part but does not create 
it: the absence of love shews that the 
fellowship has never been realised. 
For the use of ‘abide’ in various 
connexions see v. 6, iii. 14, iv. 16; 2 
John 9; John xii. 46. 

By love the disciple ‘follows’ his 
Master and has ‘the light of life’ 
(John viii. 12). 

oxdv8adov...€arw] scandalum in eo 
non est V., there is none occasion of 
stumbling in him. The image occurs 
elsewhere in St John’s writings in 
John vi. 61, xvi. 1; Apoc. ii, 14; 
comp. John xi. 9 f It is at first 
sight doubtful whether the occasion of 
stumbling is that which may be in the 
way of others or in the way of the 
believer himself. A man may cause 
others to fall through want of love or 


he may by the same defect create 
difficulties in his own path. 

The parallel in Ὁ. 11 favours the 
second view. Love gives the single 
eye which commands a clear prospect 
of the course to be followed, while if 
love be absent doubts and question- 
ings arise which tend to the over- 
throw of faith (2 Pet. i. 10). But on 
the other hand the general use of 
σκάνδαλον points to the first meaning, 
and it is quite in St John’s manner to 
regard love in its twofold working in 
relation to the man who loves and to 
others, while he regards hatred only 
in its subject. The triumph of love is 
that it creates no prejudice against 
the Truth. Want of love is the most 
prolific source of offences. 

ἐν αὐτῷ] in him. If the ‘offence’ 
is that which stands in a man’s own 
way, then he is regarded as offering 
in himself the scene of his spiritual 
advance: his progress, his dangers, are 
spiritual, internal. If the offence is 
that which lies in another’s way, then 
he who gives the offence presents 
the cause of stumbling in his own 
person. 

11. Of the fruits of love it is suffi- 
cient to say that ‘he that loveth 
abideth in the light, and there is 
none occasion of stumbling in him.’ 
The issues of hatred are traced in dif- 
ferent directions. They are regarded 
both in respect of present being (és 
in) and action (zwalketh in) and in 
respect of the final goal (knoweth 
not whither) to which life is directed. 
He who hates has lost the faculty of 
seeing, which requires light and love, 
‘so that his whole life is a continual 
error’ (Howe). 

éotiv...mepuraret...) Comp.i.7. The 


11. 11] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 57 


\ > 3 a - , «“ © / ae 
καὶ οὐκ οἶδεν ποῦ ὑπάγει, ὅτι ἡ σκοτία ἐτυφλωσεν 


phrase πορεύεσθαι ἐν σκότει is used in 
a different sense in Is. |. 10. 

οὐκ older...) Anoweth not... John 
xii. 35; Prov. iv. 19. On the other 
hand that which was true of Christ 
(John viii. 12, xiii. 3) is true also of 
the believer (comp. John xiv. 4, 5). 
He knows what is the end of life. 

ὑπάγει] goeth. The idea is not that 
of proceeding to a definite point 
(πορεύεσθαι), but of leaving the present 
scene. 

ἐτύφλ. τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς] The image 
comes from Is. vi. 10 (John xii. 40), 
which is the fundamental description 
of God’s mode of dealing with the 
self-willed. Comp. Rom. si. Io (Ps. 
lxix. 24); and for the opposite Eph. i. 
18 πεφωτισμένους τοὺς od. τῆς καρδίας. 
(Clem. 1 Cor. 36.) 

ἐτύφλωσεν) The English idiom will 
not bear the exact rendering blinded. 
The original tense (comp. 2 Cor. iv. 4 
and contrast John xii. 40) marks the 
decisive action of the darkness at the 
fatal moment when it once for all 
‘overtook’ the man (John xii. 35 iva 
μὴ καταλάβῃ, i. 5 ov κατέλαβεν). This 
darkness not only hindered the use of 
vision but (as darkness does physically) 
destroyed the spiritual organ. 


-IV. THINGS TEMPORAL AND ETERNAL 
(ii, 12—17). 


Hitherto St John has stated briefly 
the main scope of his Epistle. He 
bas shewn what is the great problem 
of life, and how the Gospel meets it 
with an answer and a law complete 
and progressive, old and new. He 
now pauses, as it were, to contemplate 
those whom he is addressing more 
distinctly and directly, and to gather 
up in a more definite form the charge 
which is at once the foundation and 
the end of all he writes. 

The section is divided into two 
parts. The Apostle first gives the 


ground of his appeal (ev. 12—14); 
and then he gives the appeal itself 
(15—17). 

1. The ground of the appeal (ii. 
12—I4). 

The ground of the Apostle’s appeal 
lies in the character and position of 
those whom he is addressing. He 
regards his readers first under their 
common aspect as all alike believers, 
and then under a twofold aspect as 
‘fathers’ and ‘young men,’ separated 
one from another by the length of 
their Christian experience. This he 
does twice, first in respect of the ac- 
tual work in which he is at the moment 
engaged, and then again in respect of 
a work looked upon as finished and 
complete. He shews with an im- 
pressive iteration that from first to 
last, in all that he writes or has written, 
one unchanging motive is supreme. 
Because his readers are Christians 
and have in part experienced the 
power of their faith he moves them 
to nobler efforts; his object is that 
their ‘joy may be fulfilled’ (c. i. 4). 

The exact relation of γράφω to 
ἔγραψα has been variously explained. 
It may be a reference to some other 
writing which has not been preserved, 
or, as some think, to the Gospel (comp. 
3 John 9; 1 Cor. v. 9; 2 Cor. ii. 3 f, 
vii. 12); but the use of ἔγραψα in vv. 
21, 26 is unfavourable to this view. 

It may mark a contrast between 
the former part of the letter, and 
that part which the Apostle is now 
writing, as if he resumed his work 
after an interval and looked back upon 
the words already written (comp. 
1 Cor. ix. 15; Rom. xv. 15). 

Or it may indicate simply a change 
of mental position in accordance with 
which St John transfers himself to 
the place of his readers, and regards 
the whole letter as they would do, as 
belonging to a past date. 

Or yet again, to put this mode of 


58 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


. ἢ ΄ 
τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς αὐτοῦ. 


explanation in another form, St John 
may look at his letter first as it is in 
the process of transcription still in- 
complete (1 Cor. xiv. 37; 2 Cor. xiii. 
10), and then as it is ideally com- 
plete. This appears to be the true 
explanation of the ‘epistolary aorist. 
Comp. vv. 21, 26, v. 13; 2 John 12; 
1 Pet. v.12; Gal. vi. 11; Philem. 19, 21. 

The Latin renderings of γράφω and 
ἔγραψα are alike scribo. 

The symmetry of the corresponding 
clauses is remarkable. 

(1) I write to you, little children 

(rexvia), because 

your sins are forgiven you 
for His name’s sake. 
(a) I write to you, fathers, be- 
cause 
ye know Him that is from the 
beginning. 
(B) I write to you, young men, 
because 
ye have overcome the evil 
one. 
(2) I have written (I wrote) to 
you, little ones (παιδία), because 
ye know the Father. 
(a) I have written (I wrote) to 
you, fathers, because 
ye know Him that is from 
the beginning. 
(8) I have written (I wrote) to 
you, young men, because 
ye are strong and the word 
of God abideth in you and 
ye have overcome the evil 
one. 

The common title of address is 
different in the two cases (1) Jitéle 
children; (2) little ones. And in 
correspondence with this the aspect 
of the common ground of addressing 
those who are thus designated is also 
different (1) because your sins are 
Sorgiven for His name's sake; (2) 
because ye know the Father. The 
special ground of addressing ‘the 
fathers’ is the same in each case: 


(II. 12 
1 , ΤΠ if 
ραφω ὑμῖν, τεκνία, 


that of addressing ‘the young men’ is 
not changed in the second case but 
more fully developed. 

The causes of these variations will 
appear as we examine the text. 

Augustine, like many others, sup- 
poses that three classes of readers are 
addressed. On this assumption he 
characterises them vigorously : 

Filii sunt, patres sunt, juvenes sunt. 
ἘΠῚ quia nascuntur: patres quia 
principium agnoscunt: juvenes, quare? 
Quia vicistis malignum. In filiis 
nativitas, in patribus antiquitas, in 
juvenibus fortitudo. 

12. Τράφω] I write. Compare vc. 1, 
and contrast i. 4 (we write). For the 
present tense compare Gal. i. 20; 
1 Cor. xiv. 37; 2 Cor. i. 13; 1 Tim. 
iii. 14. 

τεκνία] filioli V., little children. 
Comp. v. 1 my little children. The 
simple title occurs again τ. 28 (iii. 7), 
iv. 4, v. 21. The word which ex- 
presses fellowship of nature is con- 
nected with that which is the sign of 
it, the forgiveness of sins. Comp. 
John iii. 5. Both from the symmetry 
of the structure (little children, 
JSathers, young men), and from the 
general scope of the passage, it is 
evident that the title (here as else- 
where) is addressed to all St John’s 
readers and not to a particular class 
of children in age. 

ὅτι] quoniam V., quia Aug., be- 
cause. There can be no doubt that 
the particle is causal (because) and 
not declarative (that). St John does 
not write to make known the privi- 
leges of Christians, but to enforce 
the duties which follow from the en- 
joyment of them. 

ἀφέωνται v. αἱ dy.) remittuntur 
vobis peccata V., your sins are for- 
given, ie. have been forgiven. The 
present of the Latin is misleading 
though the past forgiveness of sin 
carries with it the constant applica- 


11. 12] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 59 


ἐξ ? ΄ con « © , Ἢ A) wt 2 - 
OTe ἀῴφέωνται ὑμῖν at ἁμαρτίαι διὰ TO ὄνομα αὐτοῦ. 


tion of the grace to which it was due: 
John xiii, 10. In parallel narra- 
tives, it may be added, ἀφίενται is 
used by St Matthew (ix. 2, 5) and St 
Mark (ii. 5, 9), and ἀφέωνται by St 
Luke (v. 20, 23). In Luke vii. 47 f. 
ἀφέωνται is practically undisturbed. 
The reading in John xx. 23 is some- 
what doubtful (ἀφέωνται, ἀφίενται). 

The proclamation of the forgiveness 
of sins was the message of the Gospel: 
Luke xxiv. 47; Acts xiii. 38. This 
includes potentially the fulfilment of 
man’s destiny asman. Comp.i.9 note. 
For Christ’s sake the Father (Ὁ. 14) for- 
gives those who are united with Him. 

διὰ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ] propter nomen 
gus V., per ne. Aug., for His names 
sake. There is no direct antecedent ; 
but from ὁ. 6 the thought of Christ as 
the perfect exemplar of divine love 
has been present to the mind of the 
apostle; and the pronoun clearly re- 
fers to Him. Forgiveness is granted 
to men because Christ is indeed what 
He is revealed to be and what His 
‘name’ expresses. It is of course 
assumed that Christians acknowledge 
Him as being what He is (Matt. xxviii. 
19). 

Redemption is referred to Christ as 
He has been made known, both in 
respect of the fact that that revelation 
contains the force through which as 
the means (διά gen.) and the ground 
Jor the sake of which as the cause 
(διά ace.) it is accomplished, See c. iv. 
9 ζήσωμεν δὲ’ αὐτοῦ; John vi. 57 ζήσει 
δ ἐμέ, The latter construction is 
very rare. Comp. John xv. 3 καθαροί 
ἐστε διὰ τὸν λόγον; Apoc. xii, 11 ἐνί- 
κησαν διὰ τὸ αἷμα τοῦ ἀρνίου. 

For διὰ τὸ ὄνομα see Matt. x. 22, 
xxiv. 9 and parallels; John xv, 21; 
Apoc. ii. 3. 

διὰ τοῦ ὀνόματος Acts iv. 30, ¥. 43; 
1 Cor. i. Io. 

In two other places of the Epistle 
‘the name’ of Christ is mentioned as 


the object of faith in different aspects. 
The commandment of God is that we 
believe the name (πιστεύειν τῷ dv.) of 
lis Son Jesus Christ (iii. 23), that 
is, that we accept the revelation con- 
veyed in that full title as true. And 
again those who believe in the name 
(πιστεύειν εἰς τὸ dv.) Of the Son of 
God (v. 13), who cast themselves 
wholly upon the revelation, are as- 
sured of the possession of life eternal 
(comp. John i. 12 note). With these 
passages must be compared John xx. 
31, where St John says that the ob- 
ject of his Gospel was that his readers 
may believe that Jesus ts the Christ, 
the Son of God, and believing may 
hace life in His name (ἐν τῷ ὀν.), in 
fellowship with Him as He has thus 
been made known. 

The pregnant use of ‘the name’ as 
summing up that which is made known 
of Christ, explains how it came to be 
used as equivalent to ‘the faith’: 3 
John 7 ὑπὲρ τοῦ ὀνόματος ἐξῆλθαν. 
See Additional Note on iii. 23. 

13. Believers, who are one in the 
possession of the gift of forgiveness, 
are distinguished by the circum- 
stances of life. Differences of ex- 
perience correspond generally to dif- 
ferences of age. Mature Christians, in 
a society like that which St John ad- 
dressed, would be ‘fathers’ in years. 
The difference of ‘fathers’ and ‘young 
men’ answers to that of ‘the thinkers, 
and the soldiers in the Christian 
army,’ to the two main applications of 
the Faith. It is a spring of wisdom; 
and it is also aspring of strength. In 
the natural sequence action is the 
way to that knowledge through which 
wisdom comes. Christian wisdom is 
not speculative but first the fruit of 
work and then the principle of work. 

The characteristic of ‘fathers’ is 
knowledge, the fruit of experience 
(ἐγνώκατε): that of ‘young men,’ 
victory, the prize of strength. St 


60 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Beypadw ὑμῖν, πατέρες, 
ve ὃ 
δ ἂν ὡς 
ypapw ὑμῖν, νεανίσκοι, 


(II. 13 


, A ~ 

ὅτι ἐγνώκατε Tov ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς" 
f A ΄ 

ὅτι νενικήκατε τὸν πονηρόν. 


13 τὸ πονηρόν &. 


John bases his appeal to each class on 
that which they had severally gained. 
πατέρες] The word, like 18, Abba, 
pater, papa, is used naturally of those 
who stand in a position of responsible 
authority. Thus it is applied in the 
O.T. to prophets (2 K. ii. 12; vi. 21; 
xiii. 14), priests (Jud. xvii. 10; xviii. 
19), teachers (Prov. i. 8). Comp. Matt. 
xxiii. 9; (1 Cor. iv. 15;) Acts vii. 2; 
xxii. 1. Here the natural character- 
istic of age is combined with that of 
eminence in the Christian body. 

ὅτι ἐγνώκατε] guoniam (quia) cog- 
novistis V., because ye know.... The 
essence of wisdom lies in the recog- 
nition of the unity of purpose which 
runs through the whole development 
of being, and of that unity of life 
which exists in all This truth is 
brought home through the deeper 
understanding of the age-long reve- 
lation of God consummated in the 
Incarnation and interpreted by the 
Spirit. 

For the idea of knowledge see Ὁ. 3 
note. God can be known only in His 
Son. The knowledge here spoken of 
is that which is the result of the past 
still abiding (ἐγνώκατε) and not that 
which marked a crisis in growth 
(ἔγνωτε) or which is still in continuous 
advance (γινώσκετε). 

τὸν an’ ἀρχῆς] cum qui ab initio 
(a principio Aug.) est V., Him that 
is from the beginning, the Word, 
that is, brought near to us in the 
Person of Christ Jesus. The title 
sums up shortly what is expressed 
in its successive stages in John i. 
1—14, the Word through Whom all 
things were made, and in Whom all 
things consist, Who, as Life, was 
the Light of men, Who was ever 
coming into the world which He 


made, Who became Flesh. Zhe word 
of life (c. i. 1) is the record of the 
revelation of Him that is from the 
beginning. The whole course of 
history is, when rightly understood, 
the manifestation of one will. To 
know this in Christ is the prerogative 
of a ‘father,’ and the knowledge is 
the opportunity for the completest 
life. 

νεανίσκοι] adulescentes V., juvenes 
Aug., young men in the full vigour of 
opening life. Comp. Matt. xix. 20; 
Luke vii. 14. 

νενικήκατε] have overcome, not ‘over- 
came’ simply (6. v. 4 ἡ νίκη ἡ νικήσα- 
σα). The past remains effective. The 
image, based on John xvi. 33, is cha- 
racteristic of the Apocalypse (ii. 7 ff., 
xii. 11, xxi. 7) and of this Epistle: 
Ὁ. 14, iv. 4, v. 4 f. 

τὸν πονηρόν] malignum V., the 
evil one, Ὁ. 14, iii. 12, v. 18 f£.; John 
xvii. 15; Matt. vi. 13, xiii. 19, 38 (v. 
37, 39). The personal aspect of the 
Christian conflict on its spiritual side 
is naturally brought out now. Dark- 
ness has its prince: John xii. 31, xiv. 
30, xvi. 11. It is assumed that a con- 
flict is inevitable unless men passively 
yield to the power of evil (6. v. 19). 
Comp. Eph. ii. 2, vi. 12. The abrupt- 
ness with which the idea of ‘the evil 
one’ is introduced shews that it was 
familiar. See Additional Note. 

14 At the close of Ὁ. 13 there is a 
pause in thought if not a break in the 
composition of the letter. Looking 
back on the record of his purpose the 
apostle appears to resume the thread 
of his argument: ‘I write, yea I have 
written, because you have had ex- 
perience of the Faith.’ 

παιδία] infantes V., pueri Aug., 
little ones. This title, little ones, which 
like rexvia is applied to the whole 


II. 14] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 61 


14 con , «“ ΄ 

ἔγραψα ὑμῖν, παιδία, ὅτι ἐγνώκατε τὸν πατέρα: 
at con 4 v4 ΄ ΕΣ ἅν 9 ’ - 
ἔγραψα ὑμῖν, πατέρες, ὅτι ἐγνώκατε τὸν ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς" 
ow con , uf > U 
ἔγραψα ὑμῖν, νεανίσκοι, ὅτι ἰσχυροί ἐστε Kal 6 λόγος 


14 ἔγραψα ὑ. π. SABC the me syrr: γράφω ὑ. π. ς΄. 


τὸ am’ ἀρχῆς Β. 


ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ NAC vg syrr: -- τοῦ θεοῦ B the. 


Christian body, differs from little 
children by emphasising the idea of 
subordination and not that of kins- 
manship. §t John speaks not as shar- 
ing the nature of those to whom he 
writes, but as placed in a position of 
authority over them. Comp. . 18 
(John xxi. 5). 

In correspondence with this dif- 
ference in the address St John gives 
a different reason for his writing: 
because ye know the Father. 

The sense of an immediate personal 
relationship to God (comp. John xiv. 7) 
gives stability to all the gradations of 
human authority. In this respect 
‘knowing the Father’ is different from 
‘knowing .Him that is from the 
beginning.’ The former involves a 
direct spiritual connexion: the latter 
involves besides an intellectual appre- 
hension of the divine ‘plan’ The 
knowledge ‘of the Father’ is that 
of present love and submission: the 
knowledge of Him ‘that is from the 
beginning’ is sympathy with the 
Divine Thought which is fulfilled in 
all time. 

At the same time the two titles 
‘little children,’ ‘little ones,’ indi- 
cate a twofold spiritual position. As 
‘little children’ we are all bound one 
to another by the bond of natural 
affection: as ‘little ones’ we all re- 
cognise our equal feebleness in the 
presence of the One Father. It may 
be added that the relation of the 
readers of the letter to the Apostle 
really determined their relation to 
God (ce. i. 3). Ἴ 

There is a difference in the genera 
ground for writing (v. 12 because your 
sins are forgiven..., v. 14 because ye 


know the Father), but in writing to 
‘the fathers’ specially there is no 
change, no development, in St John’s 
language. The knowledge of Christ 
as the Word, active from the begin- 
ning of Creation, includes all that we 
can know. At the same time this 
knowledge is regarded in two dif- 
ferent aspects corresponding to the 
two general ideas of forgiveness and 
Fatherhood (vz. 12, 14); even as the 
Incarnation satisfies man’s need of 
redemption and his need of consum- 
mation. 

In writing to ‘the young men’ St 
John makes no change in his reason 
(because ye have overcome the evil one) 
but he develops what he has said. 
He adds the twofold permanent 
ground of the Christian’s victory to 
the assertion of the fact which he 
made before. The young soldier is 
‘strong’ (ἰσχυρός comp. Eph. vi. 10; 
Matt. vii. 29) as having the personal 
qualifications for his work ; and ‘the 
word of God abideth in him,’ so 
that he is in living contact with the 
source of life. The natural endowment 
of energetic vigour is consecrated to 
a divine end by a divine voice. 

ὁ λόγος...μένει...1 the word...abid- 
eth... Comp. ve. 24, 27; John xv. 7 
(v. 3). The converse thought occurs 
John viii. 31. Comp. 6. i. 10 note. 


2. The appeal (ii. 15—17). 

In the preceding verses St John has 
set forth the privileges of Christians 
both generally in their sense of for- 
giveness and of a Divine Fatherhood, 
and specially in the far-reaching wis- 
dom of the old, and the victorious 
strength of the young: he now goes 


62 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IT. 14 


~ a > ὧν A 7 A [2 
[τοῦ θεοῦ] ἐν ὑμῖν μένει καὶ νενικήκατε τὸν πονήρον. 


on to enforce the consequence which 
is made possible. A great ‘love not’ 
follows on the command to love. 

The structure of the passage is 
simple and regular. The prohibition 
(15 a) is followed by a view of its over- 
whelming necessity. The love of the 
world is incompatible with the love of 
the Father (15 δ), for the objects of 
love determine its character (16). And 
further: there is between them the 
contrast of time and eternity, of 
transition and abiding (17). 

tsLove not the world nor the things 
in the world. If,any one loce the 
world, the love of the Father is not in 
him: **because all that is in the 
world, the desire of the flesh, and the 
desire of the eyes, and the vainglory 
of life, is not of the Father, but is of 
the world. τ And the world is pass- 
ing away, and the desire thereof, 
but he that doeth the will of God 
abideth for ever. 

The three false tendencies under 
which St John ranges ‘all that is 
in the world’ cover the whole ground 
of worldliness, of the temptation 
to set up the creature as an end. 
They offer typical tests of man’s real 
state as to himself, as to things 
external, and (specially) as to his fel- 
low-men. Or, if we follow the division 
suggested by the words (ἐπιθυμία, ἐπι- 
θυμία, ἀλαζονία), they indicate prevail- 
ing false views in regard to want and 
to possession. We desire wrongly 
and we glory wrongly in what we 
have. 

The ‘wants’ which man feels can 
be divided into two great classes. 
Some things he desires to appropriate 
personally: some things he desires to 
enjoy without appropriation. The 
desire of the flesh embraces the one 
class (¢g. gratification of appetites); 
the desire of the eyes the other (eg. 
pursuit of art as an end). 

The wrong use of possession lies in 


the empty and ostentatious assertion 
of advantages which are placed in a 
wrong light. A superiority is asserted 
on external grounds which cannot be 
justified in the face of the true issues 
of life. The ἀλάζων is in this case 
‘one who lays claim to blessings 
which are not truly his for the sake 
of renown’ (comp. Theophr. Char. 
δ 23; [Plat.] Def. p. 416 ἀλαζονεία 
ἕξις προσποιητικὴ ἀγαθοῦ ἢ ἀγαθῶν τῶν 
μὴ ὑπαρχόντων). 

The three tendencies naturally re- 
call the three Temptations of the 
Lord, with which they have obvious 
points of contact. The first Tempta- 
tion corresponds to the first and most 
elementary form of ἐπιθυμία τῆς σαρ- 
xos, the desire of the simplest support 
of natural life. A divine word is 
sovereign over this: the means which 
God uses are not limited to one 
form (Luke iv. 4). The offer of the 
kingdoms of the civilized world (τῆς 
οἰκουμένης) and their glory, which is 
placed second in St Luke’s order 
seems to answer in the loftiest shape 
to ἐπιθυμία τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν, the power 
of commanding all that is fairest and 
most attractive in the world. Here 
also Scripture shews that no aim how- 
ever true and noble can be allowed to 
trench on the absolute homage due 
to God (Luke iv. 8). And again the 
call to claim an open manifestation of 
God’s protecting power touches the 
root of ἀλαζονία τοῦ βίου, in which 
endowments and gifts are used arbi- 
trarily for personal ostentation. Such 
use is a tempting of God from Whom 
man dares to isolate himself (Luke 
iv. 12). 

Ithas been felt no less natural tolook 
for some correspondence between the 
threefold worldly tendencies of St John 
and the three master vices which oc- 
cupy ἃ prominent place in ancient and 
medizeval ethics, φιληδονία, πλεονεξία, 
φιλοδοξία, voluptas, avaritia, superbia. 


11. 15] 


τ Μὴ > a \ G δὲ Noo ° , 
ἢ αἀγαάπατε TOV ΚΟσμον μῆοε τα EV τω κοσμω. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 63 


27 
εαν 


~ A ¥ 14 ΄σ΄ 
τις ἀγαπᾷ τὸν κόσμον, οὐκ ἔστιν ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ πατρὸς 


2 


15 ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ πατρός NB vg syrr the me: ἡ dy. τοῦ θεοῦ AC. 


The correspondence is so far real, 
though not direct, that the germs of 
these special vices lie in the feelings 
which St John characterises. Comp. 
Just. M. Dial. 82, p. 308 D διὰ δέος 
οὖν [Ezech. iii. 17 ff] καὶ ἡμεῖς σπου- 
δάζομεν ὁμιλεῖν κατὰ τὰς γραφάς, ov διὰ 
φιλοχρηματίαν ἢ φιλοδοξίαν ἢ φιληδο- 
νίαν" ἐν οὐδενὶ γὰρ τούτων ἐλέγξαι ἡμᾶς 
ὄντας δύναταί τις. 

The enumeration does not include 
spiritual sins. These are not, under 
the present aspect, ‘of the world’ or 
‘in the world.’ St John has dwelt 
before on the relation of man to man 
—love and hatred; and he dwells 
afterwards on the relation of man to 
true opinion. Here he is considering 
the relation of man to the κόσμος as 
an external system which has lost its 
true character: Rom. viii. 19 f. 

15. My ἀγαπᾶτε] Nolite diligere V., 
Love not. The command is not given 
to any particular class (as to the 
young) but to all. That which man 
may not do, being what he is, God 
can do, John iii. 16 (ἠγάπησεν τὸν 
κόσμον). God looks through the sur- 
face of things by which man is misled 
to the very being which He created. 

τὸν κόσμον] mundum V., the world, 
the order of finite being regarded as 
apart from God. The Roman empire 
with its idolatry of the Emperor as the 
representative of the State, presented 
the idea in a concrete and impressive 
form. See Essay I. 

The system as an organised whole 
(κόσμος) is in other places considered 
as the dominant form of life, the age 
(ὁ αἰὼν οὗτος, ὁ νῦν αἰών). Comp. Rom. 
xii. 2; 2 Tim. iv. 2. 

For the use of κόσμος see John i. 
10 note. 

With ‘the world’ are joined ‘the 
things in the world,’ all, that is, which 


finds its proper sphere and fulfilment 
in a finite order and without God. 
‘To be in the world’ is the opposite 
to ‘being in God.’ The question is 
not of the present necessary limita- 
tions of thought and action but of 
their aim and object. Whatever is 
treated as complete without reference 
to God is so far a rival to God. This 
thought is brought out in the words 
which follow. 

Augustine illustrates the idea in 
respect of the love of nature: Non te 
prohibet Deus amare ista sed non 
diligere ad beatitudinem, sed ad hoc 
probare et laudare ut ates creatorem. 
Quemadmodum...... si sponsus faceret 
sponsee suce annulum et illa acceptum 
annulum plus diligeret quam sponsum 
qui illi fecerit annulum ; nonne in ipso 
dono sponsi anima adultera deprehen- 
deretur quamvis hoc amaret quod 
dedit sponsus? 

ἐάν tis...) There can be but one 
supreme object of moral devotion. All 
secondary objects will be referred to 
this. The love of the finite as an 
absolute object necessarily excludes 
the love of the Creator (the Father). 
Comp. Rom. i. 25; James iv. 4 (ἡ 
φιλία τοῦ. κόσμου). Unum cor duos 
tam sibi adversarios amores non capit : 
Matt. vi. 24 (Bede, ad loc.). 

Here as elsewhere St John places 
the contrast before his readers in its 
ultimate essential form, as of light 
and darkness, love and hatred. He as- 
sumes that there cannot be a vacuum 
in the soul. So Augustine writes: 
Noli diligere mundum. Exclude ma- 
lum amorem mundi ut implearis 
amore Dei. Vas es sed adhuc plenus 
es; funde quod habes ut accipias 
quod non habes. 

It will be observed also that he 
speaks here of the love of the Father 


64 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[II. 16 


2 ? an τό «' fal \ 2 A , δι e ᾿ θ , a 
εν auTw ΟΤι σὰν TO εν Tw KOT MW η ETLOUPLLA τῆς 


and ποὺ of the love of God (c. ii. 5 note). 
The phrase is unique (comp. Col. i. 
12 f.), and suggests as the object of 
man’s love God as He has been 
pleased to bring Himself within the 
range of man’s knowledge (John xiv. 
9; comp. 6. i. 2 note). Thus it ex- 
presses primarily the love of ‘the 
children’ of God to God; but this 
love answers to and springs out of the 
love shewn to them by ‘the Father’ 
whom ‘they know’ (Ὁ. 14). 

By the ‘love of the world, and of the 
things in the world’ the sense of the 
personal relationship to God is lost, 
and not merely the sense of a divine 
presence. Of the man who is swayed 
by such a passion it must be said that 
the love of the Father is not in him 
as an animating, inspiring power (c. i. 
10). This phrase expresses more than 
‘he loveth not God’ or ‘he loveth not 
the Father’ That form of expres- 
sion would describe a simple fact: this 
presents the fact as a ruling principle. 
The exact order of the Greek is 
remarkable: ‘there exists not, what- 
ever he may say, the love of the 
Father in him.’ Comp.c.i.5; iv. 16f.; 
John v. 45; vi. 45; vii. 28; viii. 44, 
50, 54; ix. 16; X. 12, 34; xiii. το, 16. 

The thought finds a striking expres- 
sion under the imagery of St John in 
a fragment of Philo quoted by John 
of Damascus (Parall. Sacra a, Tit. 
XXX. P. 370): ἀμήχανον συνυπάρχειν 
THY πρὸς κόσμον ἀγάπην τῇ πρὸς τὸν 
θεὸν ἀγάπῃ, ὡς ἀμήχανον συνυπάρχειν 
ἀλλήλοις φώς καὶ σκότος. 

16. ὅτι...] because... Τὰ moral 
and spiritual things there is a law of 
equilibrium. Nothing rises higher 
than its source. The desire of things 
earthly as ends in themselves comes 
from the world and is bounded by the 
world. It is therefore incompatible 
with the love of the Father. 

The point of sight from which ll 
that is in the world’ is regarded here 


is more distinctly defined than in Ὁ. 
15. In themselves all finite objects, 
‘the things that are in the world,’ are 
‘of the Father.’ It is the false view 
of them which makes them idols. 
Hence St John defines ‘that which is 
in the world, that which, as now re- 
garded, finds its consummation ‘in the 
world, from the human side. The 
feeling which misuses the object de- 
termines and shews by its misuse 
what there is defective in the object 
which gives occasion to the wrong- 
doing. 

This general aspect of the question 
determines the exact form of lan- 
guage. St John writes πᾶν ro ἐν τ. κ. 
and not πάντα ra ἐν τ. x. He looks at 
‘all’ in its unity in relation to the 
feeling man. Comp. c. v. 4: Eph. v. 
13 (πάντα, wav). The world as such 
has nothing more to offer than what 
is summed up in the three typical 
phrases by which πᾶν is defined. This 
thought has been made wrongly the 
main thought of the sentence by the 
Latin versions: omne quod in mundo 
est concupiscentia (desiderium) car- 
nis est ét.... 

ἡ ἐπιθυμία τῆς σαρκός) concupiscen- 
tia (desiderium Aug.) carnis V., 
the desire of the flesh, the desire of 
which the flesh is the seat. The geni- 
tive with ἐπιθυμία is in the N. T. 
characteristically subjective (John viii. 
44; Rom. i. 24; Apoc. xviii. 14). 
Comp. Gal. v. 16, 24; Eph. ii. 3; 1 
Pet. ii. 11 (αἱ σαρκικαὶ ἐπιθυμίαι), Rom. 
xiii. 14; 1 Pet. iv. 2 (ἀνθρώπων ἐπιθυ- 
pias); Tit. ii 12 (αἱ κοσμικαὶ ἐπιθυ- 
pia). 

Under this category are included 
all desires which involve the appro- 
priation of the object to which they 
are directed. By the separate men- 
tion of οἱ ὀφθαλμοί the sense of σάρξ 
is proportionately limited. 

In St John generally σάρξ is used 
to express humanity under the present 


II. 16] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


65 


ἐν \ ῃ n ms 
σαρκὸς καὶ ἡ ἐπιθυμία τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν καὶ ἡ ἀλαζονία 


” 


τοῦ βίου, οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ TOU 
conditions of life (6. iv. 2; 2 John 7; 
John i. 14; vi. 51—55; xvii.2). Once 
the θέλημα σαρκός is set by the side of 
θέλημα ἀνδρός as distinct from it (John 
i. 13); twice σάρξ is opposed to πνεῦμα 
(John iii, 6; vi. 63); and once κατὰ 
τὴν σάρκα is used to describe a judg- 
ment which is external, superticial, 
destitute of moral insight (John viii. 
15). The desire of the σάρξ as σάρξ 
is necessarily for that which is like 
itself. It cannot include any spiritual 
element. 

Compare Additional Note on iii. 19. 

ἡ ἐπιθ. τῶν ὀφθ. concupiscentia 
(desiderium Aug.) oculorum V., the 
desire of the eyes, the desire of which 
the eyes are the organ: not the 
pleasure of the miser only or charac- 
teristically (Eccles. iv. 8; v. 11), but 
all personal vicious indulgence repre- 
sented by seeing. The desire of ap- 
propriation enters into ‘the desire of 
the flesh’: the ‘desire of the eyes’ is 
satisfied by enjoyment which comes 
under the general form of contem- 
plation. So far it is true that in 
the former the thought of physical 
pleasure is dominant, as the object 
of desire, while in the latter forms 
of mental (‘psychical’) pleasure find 
place. The ‘eyes’ are the typical 
example of the organs to which art 
ministers. 

Augustine gives a singular illustra- 
tion of what he holds to be ‘the 
desire of the eyes, which is worth 
quoting as giving a vivid trait in the 
Christian feeling of his time: Ali- 
quando tentat etiam [curiositas] ser- 
vos Dei, ut velint quasi miraculum 
facere: tentare utrum exaudiat illos 
Deus in miraculis. Curiositas est; 
hoc est desiderium oculorum; non 
est a patre. 

ἡ ἀλαζ. τοῦ βίου] superbia vite V., 
ambitio seculi Aug. (other Latin au- 


W. J. 


f ᾽ ‘ 2 “- / 
πατρος, ἀλλα EK τοῦ κοσ- 


thorities give jactantia hujus vita, 
vite humane), the vainglory of life, 
the vainglory which springs out of 
and belongs to our visible earthly life. 
The genitive is subjective, as in the 
two other cases. The ἀλαζών (comp. 
Rom. i. 30; 2 Tim. iii. 2) is closely 
connected with the ὑπερήφανος; but 
his vice centres in self and is con- 
summated in his absolute self-exalta- 
tion, while the ὑπερήφανος shews his 
character by his overweening treat- 
ment of others. ‘The ἀλαζών sins most 
against truth: the ὑπερήφανος sins 
most against love. ᾿Αλαζονία may 
be referred to a false view of what 
things are in themselves, empty and 
unstable: ὑπερηφανία to a false view 
of what our relations to other persons 
are. Comp. Mk. vii. 22; Luke i. 51; 
James iv. 6; 1 Pet. v. 5. See also 
Wisd. v. 8; xvii. 7; 2 Mace. ix. 8, xv. 6; 
Prov. xxv. 6. 

Such ‘vainglory,’ such a false view 
of the value of our possessions, belongs 
to life (ὁ Bios) in its present concrete 
manifestation and not to life in its 
essential principle (ἡ ζωή). Comp. 
Luke viii. 14 (ἡδοναὶ τοῦ βίου); 1 Tim. 
ii. 2 (βίον διάγειν); 2 Tim. 11, 4 (ταῖς 
τοῦ βίου πραγματείαις); (in 1 Pet. iv. 3 
τοῦ βίου is an addition, but βιῶσαι oc- 
curs in Ὁ. 2). Hence ὁ Bios is used 
for ‘the means of life’: Mk. xii. 44; 
Luke [viii 43], xv. 12, 30; ὁ. iii. 17. 
Compare also Biwors, Acts xxvi. 4; 
and βιωτικός, Luke xxi. 34; 1 Cor. vi. 
3f. 
These characteristic feelings of want 
and of wealth, the desire of the flesh 
and the desire of the eyes, and the 
vainglory of life, are said to be, 
as man now is naturally, of the 
world (c. iv. 5 note; John xv. 19; 
xvii. 14, 16; xviii. 36). The decla- 
ration marks the false position into 
which man has come. In his original 


5 


66 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[II. 17 


© t / \ € ? / 

μου ἐστίν: “Kal ὁ κόσμος TapayeTa καὶ ἡ ἐπιθυμία 
“ a \ t - - ΄ > \ 
[αὐτοῦ], 6 δὲ ποιῶν TO θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ μένει εἰς τὸν 


ran 
atwva. 


17 ἡ ἐπιθ. αὐτοῦ : -- αὐτοῦ A. 


Many Latin authorities and (in sense) the The- 


baic version add: guomodo (sicut et) deus (ipse) manet in eternum. 


constitution the desire was good, be- 
cause it was directed consciously to- 
wards the fulfilment of his office in 
regard to the whole order and to God: 
the exultation was good, because it 
was an acknowledgment of divine 
bounty. Now the desire is suggested 
by the creature and not by the Crea- 
tor, by the object separated from the 
Living Author of all, not by the Living 
Author to whom the child should 
look (ἐκ τοῦ πατρός not simply ἐκ τοῦ 
θεοῦ). Thus each typical false ten- 
dency is the corruption of a noble 
instinct, the longing for support and 
for beauty, the joy of thankfulness. 

Est ergo triplex amor qui tria illa 
excludat que non sunt ex Patre....... 
Et forte heec sunt de quibus in Lege 
precipitur : Diliges Dominum Deum 
tuum ex toto corde tuo et ex tota 
anima tua et ex tota virtute tua 
(Deut. vi. 5), id est diliges dulciter sive 
affectuose, diliges prudenter, diliges 
fortiter (Bern. Serm. de div. xxix. 1). 

The phrase εἶναι ἐκ (v. 21; iii. 19; 
iv. 5) ἐο be of is characteristic of St 
John expressing derivation and de- 
pendence. Compare John iii. 31 note; 
and Additional Note on iii. 1. 

17. This clause contains a second 
ground for the prohibition in τ. 15. 
Not only is the love of the world irre- 
concileable with the love of the Fa- 
ther; but also, yet further, the fate 
of the world is included in its essen- 
tial character. The world—the ex- 
ternal system which occupied the 
place of God—was already when St 
John wrote in the act of dissolution 
and vanishing. 

The words can also be taken as a 
second proof of the antagonism of the 
love of the Father and of the love of 


the world, so far as these are at vari- 
ance in their issue no less than in their 
source. But this connexion appears 
to be less natural than the other. 

mapayera] is passing away: see 
Ὁ. 8 The word describes not the 
general character of the world as 
transitory but its actual condition in 
the face of the Church, ‘the Kingdom 
of God” The whole sum of finite 
things, regarded in itself as complete, 
is (as it were) a screen which hides 
the presence of God. By the declara- 
tion of the Truth this was in St John’s 
time beginning to be removed. Com- 
pare Ὁ. 8; 1 Cor. vii. 31; and contrast 
the ideal view from the divine side: 
τὰ ἀρχαῖα παρῆλθεν, ἰδοὺ γέγονεν καινά 
(2 Cor. v. 17: comp. Apoc. xxi. 4). 

In the thanksgiving after the 
Eucharist in The Doctrine of the 
Apostles the clause occurs: ἐλθέτω 
χάρις καὶ παρελθέτω ὁ κόσμος οὗτος (6. 
x. 6). 

ἡ ἐπιθυμία αὐτοῦ] concupiscentia 
(desideria Aug.) ejus V., the desire 
thereof, the desire which belongs to 
it and which it stimulates. Comp. 
Tit. ii. 12 ai κοσμικαὶ ἐπιθυμίαι. The 
gen. is subjective as in v. 16, though 
it is true that the desire which the 
world fosters is in turn directed to 
the world as its object. A verb cor- 
responding to παράγεται must be sup- 
plied. The world which is the source 
and the object of the desire is shewn 
to be by itself unsubstantial and evan- 
escent. The desire therefore is shewn 
in its utter vanity (καταργεῖται). But 
the desire remains as an aehing void. 

The contrast to this ‘desire’ which 
is earth-born and empty is ‘the will 
of God” That alone is permanent of 
which this will is the ground. 


Il. 17] 
ὁ δὲ ποιῶν..«μένει...1 qui autem 
Jacit (fecerit Aug.) V., but he that 
doeth...abideth... While the fabric of 
‘the world’ is being removed the 
Christian suffers no disturbance. The 
present in this sense is eternal. When 
all else changes the obedience of love 
continues unchanged. This abides 
in the new order to which indeed it 
properly belongs. The contrast to 
the world converted into an idol is 
not God, but the believer who in 
action strives to do God’s will. Hence 
St John does not say ‘he that loveth 
God, which might have been sug- 
gested by v. 15, but he that doeth the 
will of God abideth for ever. Such a 
one is truly akin to the Son of man: 
Mk. iii. 35. 

Compare John iv. 34; vi. 38; vii. 
17; ix. 31. 

The will of God expresses the true 
end of all things, and is opposed to 
‘the desire’ which springs from a 
finite source as its ultimate origin. 
At the same time ‘the will of God’ 
includes the right use of all natural 
powers, faculties, instincts, which in 
their essential nature answer to it: 
Apoce. iv. 11. Compare 1 Thess. iv. 3. 

In speaking of the divine will St 
John says ‘the will of God’ ‘and not 
‘the will of the Father’ as might 
seem to be suggested by τ. 16. Stress 
is laid upon the divine majesty rather 
than upon the divine love. ‘The will 
of the Father’ is found only in St 
Matthew (vi. 10 our Father, vii. 21; 
xii. 50 my Father; comp. xviii. 14; 
xxvi. 42). The will of our God and 
Father occurs Gal. i. 4 (comp. Eph. 
i. 5,9, 11). Zhe will of God is not 
unfrequent: 1 Pet. ii. 15; iii. 17; iv. 
19; Rom. i. 10; xii. 2; Heb. x. 36. 
In the Gospel of St John the phrase 
which isalways used by the Lord is 
the will of Him that sent me: iv. 34; 
v. 30; vi. 38 ff. (vii. 17). 

μένει eis τ. αἰ. abideth for ever. 
Comp. John viii. 35; xii. 34; 2 Cor. 
ix. 9 (Lxx.); 1 Pet. i. 25 (Lxx.). The 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 67 


absolute use of μένειν is not unfre- 
quent: John xv. 16; 1 Pet. i. 23; 
Heb. x. 34. 

εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα] in aternum V. This 
is the only form in which αἰών occurs 
in the Epistles (here and 2 John 2) 
and Gospel (12 times) of St John, 
except the correlative ἐκ τοῦ αἰῶνος 
(John ix. 32). The phrase occurs in- 
dependently of the xx. (1 Pet. i. 253 
2 Cor. ix. 9; Hebr. v. 6; vi. 20; vii. 
17 ff.) only (with negative) in Matth. 
xxi IgllMk. xi. 14; Mk. iii, 29; 1 
Cor. viii. 13 (Jude 13 εἰς αἰῶνα). [1 Pet. 
i. 23 and 2 Pet. ii. 17 are false read- 
ings.] It is very common in the ixx. as 
the rendering of opiy, nyipd, obiy Ww. 
The thought contained in the words 
here is given by the addition which is 
found in Theb. and Old Lat. ‘as God 
also abideth for ever’ (sicut et ipse 
manetin eternum). Augustine reads 
the addition and remarks on the 
whole passage: Voluit te amor mun- 
di, tene Christum. Propter te factus 
est temporalis ut tu fias sternus; 
quia et ille sic factus est temporalis 
ut maneret eeternus. 

And again: Terram diligis, terra 
eris. Deum diligis: quid dicam, Deus 
eris? Non audeo dicere ex me: 
scripturas audiamus go dizi, dit estis 
et filit altissimi omnes. 

Β, THE conFLictT oF TRUTH AND 
FALSEHOOD WITHOUT AND WITHIN 
(ii. 18—iv. 6). 

The broad contrast which has been 
drawn in the last section between 
things temporal and eternal, between 
the world and the Church, leads to 
the central subject of the Epistle, the 
great conflict of life, which is treated 
of in ii, 18—iv. 6. In this the hostile 
power is seen to arise from within 
the Christian society. The world has 
found expression in an anti-Christian 
system which lays claim to spiritual 
endowment and authority. False 
prophetic power (Apoc. xiii 1 ff) 
takes its place by the side of the 


5—2 


68 
18 Παιδία, ἐσχάτη ὥρα 


imperial power (Α Ροο. xii. 1 ff.). These 
false teachers, this ‘spirit of anti- 
christ,’ are ‘of the world’ (iv. 4 f.). 

Characteristic marks of this conflict 
appear throughout: ἀντίχριστος ii. 18, 
20; τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ ἀντιχρίστου iv. 3; 
Ψευδοπροφῆται iv. 1; οἱ πλανῶντες 1]. 
26, comp. iii. 7; τὸ πνεῦμα τῆς πλάνης 
iv. 6. And underneath the false spi- 
ritual teaching lies ‘the hatred’ of 
the world: iii. 13. The question is 
no longer of false opinion or vicious 
practice within the Church, but of 
temptations to yield allegiance to a 
rival power. 

The view which St John gives of 
the Christian conflict falls into four 
sections: 


J. Tue Reve.ation of FanseHoop 
AND TRUTH (ii. 18—29). 

II. Tau CaItpren or Gop And THE 
CHILDREN OF THE DEVIL (ili. I—12). 

111. Broraernoop ΙΧ CaRIstT aND 
THE HATRED OF THE WORLD (iii. 13— 
24). 

IV. Tae Rivat Spririrs or ΤΆΓΤΗ 
AND Error (iv. 1—6). 


Step by step the strength of the 
Christian is shewn in his firm hold 
upon the Truth, in the consciousness 
and the character of Sonship, in the 
activity of Love, in the power of 
Spiritual Discernment. So the con- 
flict passes to victory. 


I, Tue REVELATION or FauseHoop 
AND TrurH (ii. 18—29), 

This section is 
three parts: 

1. Antichrists and Christians (18 
—2I). 

2. The essence and the power of 
the Truth (22—25). 

3. Abiding in the Truth (26—29). 

The progress of thought is simple. 
The fact of apostasy from the Chris- 
tian body is recognised as a character- 
istic of the crisis. This fact serves to 


separable into 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


ΠῚ. 18 


᾽ Ῥ 4 εἶ ᾽ ,ὔ 
ἐστίν, καὶ καθὼς ἠκούσατε 


remind Christians of the gift which 
they have received for the discern- 
ment of the Truth. The essence of 
the Truth lies in the acknowledgment 
of the Messiahship of Jesus. The 
confession of the Son gives fellowship 
with the Father; issuing in the life 
eternal. This knowledge of God then 
Christians have to keep firmly, that 
they may face their Lord at His ap- 
pearance. And true knowledge has 
the seal of righteousness, likeness to 
God, the mark of divine sonship. 

1. Antichrists and Christians (18 
—21). 

The necessity of conflict which has 
been laid down on general grounds in 
tv. 15—17 is enforced by the special 
circumstances of the age. It is ‘a last 
hour,’ and as such marked by divisions, 
errors, temptations in the Christian 
society itself (18, 19). At the same 
time, as answering to this special 
peril, Christians have a gift of spirit- 
ual discernment which it is their pri- 
vilege to use as a decisive criterion 
of error (20, 21). 

My little ones, it is a last hour, 
and as ye heard that Antichrist 
cometh, even now many Antichrists 
have arisen; whence we perceive that 
it is a last hour. 19 They went out 
JSrom us, but they were not of us; for 
if they had been of us, they would 
hace remained with us; but they 
went out that they may be made 
manifest that they all are not of us. 
2 And ye have an unction from the 
Holy One; and ye all know—=J 
hace not written to you because ye 
know not the truth, but because ye 
know it, and because no lie is of 
the truth. 

18. Παιδία] Filioli (Pueri) V., 
My little ones. See v.14. The Apostle 
addresses his readers with the au- 
thority of age and experience, and 
not as dwelling on the thought of 
spiritual kinship (τεκνία). 


IT. 18] 


In the sentence which precedes he 
had spoken of ‘the world’ as ‘passing 
away. He now points out the decisive 
sign of the coming change in the con- 
dition of the Christian society. It is ‘a 
last hour,’ 

The conception of ‘a last time,’ ‘a 
last season,’ the ‘last days,’ rests upon 
the O. Τ᾿, in which the phrase NON 
ὉΠ is used for the distant future, 
on which the prophet’s eye is fixed. 
Thus in Gen. xlix. 1; Num. xxiv. 14 
(ἐπ᾿ ἐσχάτων [-rov] τῶν ἡμερῶν) it 
points to the time when Israel had 
entered upon the possession of Ca- 
naan, the first stage in the fulfilment 
of the divine promise. In Is. ii. 2; 
Mie. iv. 1; Hos. iii. 5; Jerem. xxiii, 
20; XXX. 24; xlviii. 47; xlix. 39, it 
describes the time when Zion shall 
be restored and the people shall fear 
and obey the Lord. In Ezek. xxxviii. 
16 it regards some particular season 
of signal deliverance. Thus the phrase 
in its biblical sense includes in part 
the notion of ‘the age to come’ and 
the immediate preparation for it. 

In post-biblical times ‘the age to 
come’ was sharply distinguished from 
the period of trial by which it was to 
be ushered in; and ‘the latter days’ 
came to be regarded as a season of 
conflict and suffering through which 
the divine victory should be accom- 
plished. This appears to be the ruling 
idea of the phrase in the N. T.: Acts 
ii. 17 ἐν ταῖς ἐσχ. jy. (Joel iii. 1, ἐσ- 
xaras being an explanatory gloss); 
James v. 3 ἐν ἐσχ. ἡμ.ι; 1 Pet. i. 20 
ἐπ᾽ ἐσχάτων τῶν χρόνων. 

But in this interpretation the suc- 
cessive partial dawnings of ‘the age 
to come’ give a different force to the 
words ‘the last days’ which usher in 
the age according to the context in 
which they occur. In one sense ‘the 
age to come’ dated from Pentecost; in 
another from the destruction of Jeru- 
salem; in another it was still the ob- 
ject of hope. So also ‘the last days’ 
are found in each of the seasons of 
fierce trial which precede the several 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 69 


comings of Christ. The age in which 
we live is, under one aspect, ‘the last 
days,’ and in another it is ‘the age to 
come,’ which was prepared by the 
travail-pains of the old order. As 
we look forward a season of sore dis- 
tress separates us from that which is 
still to be revealed (2 Tim. iii. 1; 2 
Pet. iii, 3; Jude 18; 1 Pet. i. 5, 
contrast v. 20): as we look back we 
have entered on an inheritance now 
through struggles of ‘a last time’ 

But while the great counsel of God 
goes forward to fulfilment the date of 
the consummation is not revealed: 
Acts i. 7; Matt. xxiv. 36. 

The calculation which Severus (Cra- 
mer, Cat. in loc.) makes is interesting 
in the face of our present knowledge 
of the world’s history: πεντακισχιλίων 
ἐνιαυτῶν παραδραμόντων ἐξ οὗ γέγονεν 
ὁ κόσμος. .«καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς Χριστοῦ παρου- 
σίας οὔπω πεπληρωμένων ἑξακοσίων 
ἠγοῦν ἑπτακοσίων ἣ χιλίων ἐτῶν, δῶμεν 
γὰρ οὕτω, πῶς [οὐκ] (dele) ἔξω λόγου φα- 
νήσεται τῶν ἑξακοσίων ἐτῶν ἢ χιλίων, εἰ 
τύχοι, τὰς ἡμέρας πρὸς τὰς τῶν πεντακισ- 
χιλίων παρεξεταζομένας ἐσχάτας καλεῖν; 

In this passage the anarthrous 
phrase ἐσχάτη ὥρα, novissima hora V., 
seems to mark the general character 
of the period and not its specific 
relation to ‘the end” It was a period 
of critical change, ‘a last hour,’ but not 
definitely ‘the last hour.’ The exact 
phrase is not found elsewhere in the 
N.T. (comp. 1 Pet. i. 5; 2 Tim. iii. 1). 
The use of ‘hour’ recals that in the 
Gospel: iv. 21, 23; V. 35, 38; xvi. 2, 
4, 25, 32. Compare ii. 4; vii. 30; viii. 
20; xii. 23, 27; xiii, 1; xvii. 1; and 
the idea of ‘a last hour’ corresponds 
with the characteristic phrase of St 
John ‘the last day’ (vi. 39 f., 44, 54; 
xi. 24; xii. 48). The definiteness of 
this latter phrase () ἐσχ. ἡ.) justifies 
the wider sense given to the former 
(comp. iv. 17, ἡ ἡμέρα τῆς κρίσεως note). 
Comp. Ign. ad Ephes.c. 11. The true 
reading in 1 Thess. v. 2 (ju. not ἡ nu.) 
illustrates ἐσχ- dpa here. 

καθὼς ἠκούσατε] as ye heard in 


7ο THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


(II. 18 


x ΄σ , % 
ὅτι ᾿Αντίχριστος ἔρχεται, Kal νῦν ἀντίχριστοι πολλοὲ 


18 ὅτι ᾽Αντ.. -- ὅτι A. 


general terms as part of the evangelic 
message (Mk. xiii. 6 ff.; Matt. xxiv. 5, 
24), and in the teaching of apostles 
(Acts xx. 30). Comp. 1 Tim. iv. 1. 
These general predictions of false 
Christs and false teachers were con- 
centrated in the thought of a typical 
adversary: 2 Thess. ii. 3. 

᾿Αντίχριστος)] The term Antichrist 
is peculiar to St John in the N.T. It 
occurs again v. 22; iv. 3 and 2 John 7. 
The absence of the article shews that 
it had become current as a technical 
(proper) name. 

The word means far more than 
simply ‘an adversary of Christ.’ As 
far as the form is concerned it may 
describe ‘one who takes the place of 
Christ’ (ἀντιβασιλεύς, ἀντιταμίας, ἀνθύ- 
πατος), or ‘one who under the same 
character opposes Christ’ (ἀντιδιδά- 
σκαλος, ἀντιστρατιώτης). There is a 
similar ambiguity in the word ἀντι- 
στράτηγος, Which means both ‘one 
who occupies the place of στρατηγός, 
propretor, and also ‘an opposing 
general.’ It seems to be most conso- 
nant to the context to hold that ’Avri- 
χριστος here describes one who assum- 
ing the guise of Christ opposes Christ. 
In this sense it embodies an important 
truth. That hostility is really formid- 
able in which the adversary preserves 
the semblance of the characteristic 
excellence which he opposes (comp. 
2 Cor. xi. 13; Apoc. ii. 2). The Anti- 
christ assails Christ by proposing to do 
or to preserve what He did while he 
denies Him (comp. John v. 43). The 
false Christ on the other hand (ψευδό- 
xptoros Matt. xxiv. 24) is simply a 
pretender to the Messianic office. 
In St John’s use of ‘ Antichrist’ it 
will be seen that the sense is deter- 
mined by the full Christian concep- 
tion of ‘Christ’ and not by the Jewish 
conception of the promised Saviour. 

Under one aspect it may be said 
that the work of the Incarnation was 


᾿Αντίχριστος ΒΟ: ὁ ἀντίχριστος NCA. 


to reveal the true divine destiny of 
man in his union with God through 
Christ; while the lie of Antichrist 
was to teach that man is divine apart 
from God in Christ. 

The passages in which the term 
occurs are not decisive as to St John’s 
teaching in regard to the coming of 
one great Antichrist, of which the 
others were preparatory embodiments. 
As far as his words are concerned 
‘Antichrist’ may be the personifica- 
tion of the principle shewn in dif- 
ferent antichrists, or the person 
whose appearance is prepared by 
these particular forms of evil. The 
former is however the most natural 
interpretation: ¢. 22; 2 John 7. The 
spirit of evil comes in those whom he 
inspires. Contrast 2 Thess. ii. 3 ff. 

The essential character of ‘Anti- 
christ’ lies in the denial of the true 
humanity of Messiah (v. 22 ὁ dpvov- 
μενος ὅτι Ἰησοῦς οὐκ ἔστιν ὁ χριστός. 
Iv. 3 πν. ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ (λύει) τὸν Ἰησοῦν. 
2 Jobn 7 οἱ μὴ ὁμολογοῦντες ᾿Ιησοῦν 
Χριστὸν ἐρχόμενον ἐν capki). 

This denial involves the complete 
misunderstanding of Christ’s past and 
future work, aud takes away the 
knowledge of the Father, which is 
brought to us by the Incarnate Son. 
The teaching of Antichrist leaves God 
and the world still ununited. The 
proclamation of the union is the 
message of the Gospel. 

It may be added that St John’s de- 
scription of ‘Antichrist’ (c. iv. 3) is 
made use of by Polycarp (ad Phil. 7); 
and Lrenzeus, the disciple of Polycarp, 
first developed the teaching. The 
word does not occur in the other Apo- 
stolic Fathers, or Justin Martyr, who 
does however refer to 6 rijs ἀνομίας 
ἄνθρωπος (Dial. 32, p. 250 A ὁ τῆς 
ἀποστασίας ἄνθρωπος, Dial. 1 10, p. 336 
D). It appears therefore to be cha- 
racteristic of the school of St John. 
See Additional Note. 


II. 19] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 71 


iG «.« ΄ « ? G 
γεγόνασιν: ὅθεν γινώσκομεν ὅτι ἐσχάτη ὥρα ἐστίν. 
EE ἡμῶν ἐξῆλθαν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἦσαν ἐξ ἡμῶν" εἰ γὰρ ἐξ 


19 ἐξ ἡμῶν ἦσαν (2°) BC syrr me the: ἦσαν ἐξ ἡμῶν SNA vg. 


ἔρχεται] venit (sit venturus) V., 
cometh. The same term is used of 
Christ and of His adversary. Comp. 
c. iv. 3; John xiv. 3; xxi. 22 f.; Apoe. 
xxii. 20. In both cases it implies 
something more than one advent, 
though it includes this. The rival 
power finds a personal expression as 
often as Christ comes. Comp. v. 6 
note. 

xaOds...kal viv] as...eten so now. 
Comp. John xv. 9; xvii. 18; xx. 21. 

yeyovaow] facti sunt V., have 
arisen, and fulfilled the expectation. 
The use of a different word for their 
advent (γεγόνασιν not ἐληλύθασιν) con- 
nects their appearance with the ac- 
tual conditions of the development of 
the Church. Comp. Heb. ii. 17 note. 
The use is the more remarkable as the 
verb ig not used elsewhere in the 
epistle (yet 3 John 8). The tense 
shews that these antichrists are 
spoken of as being still active. They 
are not simple types of Antichrist but 
revelations of him in many parts: c. 
iv. 3. 

For the absolute use of γίνεσθαι see 
2 Pet. ii 1; Johni. 6; ΜΙ 1. 4. 

ὅθεν γινώσκομεν... whence we per- 
ceive... because this form of trial is 
connected with each critical conflict 
which comes before an end. A full 
manifestation of (good and) evil is the 
condition of a divine judgment. 

Ὅθεν is found here only in the 
writings of St John. It is character- 
istic of the Epistle to the Hebrews 
(see ii. 17 note), but is not found in 
the Epistles of St Paul. 

19. ἐξ ἡμ. ἐξ.) Ex nobis prodierunt 
(exierunt) V., They went out from us, 
they proceeded from our midst. They 
belonged at first to our outward com- 
munion and shared all our privi- 


leges. Till the moment of separation 
they were undistinguishable from the 
rest of the Christian society; but they 
were not of us, they did not draw 
their life from our life (c. i. 3) and 50 
form living members of the body. 
Comp. Heb. vi. 4 ff. 

The change in the position of ἐξ 
ἡμῶν in the successive clauses varies 
the emphasis: ‘From us, it is true, 
they went out, but they were not of 
us; for if they had been of us really...’ 
For εἶναι ἐκ see v. 16 note. 

The phrase ἐξελθεῖν ἐξ may describe 
either removal (Apoc. xviii. 4; John 
viii. 59) or origin (Apoce. ix. 3; xiv. 
13 ff.; xix. 5, 21; John iv. 30). The 
correspondence with οὐκ ἦσαν ἐξ ἡμῶν 
decides here in favour of the latter 
sense (comp. Acts xx. 30), though it 
necessarily leads to the other. This 
trait in the Antichrists indicates one 
ground of their influence. They pro- 
fessed to speak with the voice of the 
Christian Body. Διὰ τί ἀπὸ τῶν τοῦ 
Κυρίου μαθητῶν οἱ ἀντίχριστοι; ἵν᾽ ἔ- 
χοιεν τὸ πιστὸν τοῖς πλανωμένοις κο- 
μίξζειν ὡς ἀπὸ τῶν μαθητῶν ὄντες... 
(Theophlct.) 

εἰ yap...) If they had in the truest 
sense shared our life, the life would 
have gone forward to its fruitful con- 
summation (μεμενήκεισαν ἄν perman- 
sissent utique V.). The fact of separa- 
tion revealed the imperfection of their 
fellowship. The words will not admit 
of any theoretical deductions. The test 
of experience is laid down as final. 
Non audio quid sonet, Augustine 
gays, sed video quid vivat. Opera 
loquuntur ; et verba requirimus ? 

Here, looking upon the manifest 
apostasy, St John denies the truth of 
the life; from another point of sight, 
in regard to the uncertain future, the 


72 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[11. 19 


ἡμῶν ἦσαν, μεμενήκεισαν av μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν: ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα Pavepw- 


life is presented as real, but liable to 
an abrupt close (John xv. 1 ff.). The 
two views are perfectly harmonious. 
The end of life is fruitfulness. The life 
which is barren or worse than barren is 
not life and yet potentially it was life. 

Thus Augustine can say truly in 
reference to the actual Church: Si 
antequam exirent non erant ex nobis, 
multi intus sunt, non exierunt, et 
tamen Antichristi sunt. And again: 
Sic sunt in corpore Christi quomodo 
humores mali. Compare also the 
striking language of Ignatius, ad 
Trall. 11 οὗτοι οὐκ εἰσὶ φυτεία πατρὸς 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔγγονα κατηραμένα. πᾶσα δέ, φη- 
ol ὁ κύριος, φυτεία ἣν οὐκ ἐφύτευσεν ὁ 
πατήρ μου ὁ ἐπουράνιος ἐκριζωθήτω. εἰ 
γὰρ ἦσαν τοῦ πατρὸς κλάδοι οὐκ ἂν ἦσαν 
ἐχθροὶ τοῦ σταυροῦ τοῦ Χριστοῦ ἀλλὰ 
τῶν ἀποκτεινάντων τὸν τῆς δόξης κύριον. 

It may be added that γάρ, for, is 
very rarely used in the Epistles; c. iv. 
20; v. 3; 2 John 11; 3 John 3, 7. 
As distinguished from ὅτι, because, it 
will be seen that ydp expresses a 
reason or explanation alleged (sub- 
jective), while ὅτε marks a distinct 
fact (objective) which is itself an ade- 
quate cause or explanation of that 
with which it is connected. Comp. 
c. v. 3, 4; John ii. 25; iii, 16—21; 
iii. 23 f.; ix. 22, &. 

μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν] It might have been ex- 
pected that St John would have 
written ἐν ἡμῖν, according to his cha- 
racteristic usage which is all but uni- 
versal in his Epistles; but the thought 
is not of absolute unity in one body 
but of personal fellowship one with 
another: John xiv. 16; Luke xxiv. 
29. 
ἀλλ᾽ iva...) but they went out (or 
this separation came to pass) that 
they may be made manifest (ut 
manifesti sint [manifestarentur'] V.), 
that they all are not of us i.e. that 
none of them are of us. For this 
ellipse see Johni.8; ix. 3; xiii. 18; xiv. 


31; xv. 25. The departure of these 
false teachers after a temporary 
sojourn in the Christian society was 
broughtaboutthatthey might be shewn 
in their true character, and so seen 
to be not of it. The last clause is 
rather irregular in form. The πάντες 
is inserted as it were by an after- 
thought ; ‘they went out that they 
may be made manifest that they are 
not, no not in any case, however fair 
their pretensions may be, of us.’ 

The separation of these teachers 
from the Christian Body was, with- 
out exception, a decisive proof that 
they did not belong truly to it. The 
clear revelation of their character was 
a divine provision for the avoidance 
of further evil. By ‘going out’ they 
neutralised the influence which they 
would otherwise have exercised. Comp. 
1 Cor. xi. 19. 

When the πᾶς is separated by the 
verb from the ov the negation, accord- 
ing to the usage of the New Testament, 
is always universal (ad/...not), and not 
partial (not all). Comp. Ὁ. 21; iii. 15; 
Apoc. xxii. 3; Matt. xxiv. 22 (ov... 
mas); Luke i. 37 (ov πᾶς); Acts x. 
15; Rom. iii. 20 (οὐ...πᾶς); Gal. 1. 
16 (ov...7as); Eph. v. 5; and in de- 
pendent negations, John iii. 16 (πᾶς 
--pq)} Vi 39 (πᾶς...μή); xii. 46 (id); 
1 Cor. 1. 29 (μή...πᾶς); Eph. iv. 29 
(πᾶς...μή). Comp. Apoc. xxi. 27 (οὐ 
μή..-πᾶς). 

On the other hand see Matt. vii. 21; 
Rom. ix. 6; 1 Cor. x. 23; xv. 39 (οὐ 
πᾶς). 

In the face of this usage it is im- 
possible to translate the words ‘that 
they may be made manifest them- 
selves, and that it may be made mani- 
fest in them that not all who are out- 
wardly united with the Church are of 
us, in true fellowship with Christ 

For Φφανερ. ὅτι οὐκ εἰσίν compare 
2 Cor. iii. 3 φανερούμενοι ὅτι ἐστέ. 

20. Even without this revelation 


II. 20, 21] 


θῶσιν ὅτι οὐκ εἰσὶν πάντες ἐξ ἡμῶν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 73 


Kae ers χρίσμα 


ἔχετε ἀπὸ τοῦ ἁγίου" οἴδατε πᾶντες- ὃ οὐκ ἔγραψα 


20 οἴδατε πάντες: 


in outward fact, the readers of the 
Epistle had the power of discerning 
the real character of ‘ Antichrists.’ 
‘Christians’ are themselves in a true 
sense ‘Christs,’ anointed ones, conse- 
crated to God as ‘prophets, ‘priests,’ 
and ‘kings’ (1 Pet. ii. 5 (9); Apoe. i. 
6; v.10; xx.6); and in virtue of that 
consecration endowed with corre- 
sponding blessings. So Severus (Cra- 
mer, Cat. in loc.) writes: χριστοί εἰσιν 
οὐχ of προφῆται μόνον... ἀλλ᾽ ἐξαιρέτως 
καὶ πάντες οἱ εἰς τὸν μέγαν καὶ μόνον 
καὶ ἀληθῆ Χριστὸν καὶ σωτῆρα Θεὸν 
πιστεύσαντες... «καὶ ἐν τῷ θείῳ... βαπτίσ- 
ματι συμβολικῶς τῷ μύρῳ χριόμενοι... 

καὶ ὑμεῖς... Sed (el) vos... V., And 
further you yourselves, in virtue of 
your position as contrasted with them, 
have an unction (comp. Ὁ. 27 χρίσμα 
ὃ édaBere) from the Holy One. Comp. 
vv. 24, 27; iv. 4. 

χρίσμα] unctionem V. (unguentum 
Hier.), an unction. The word, which 
expresses not the act of anointing, 
but that with which it is performed 
(‘anointing oil’ Ex. xxix. 7; xxx. 25; 
xl. 15 (uxx.); comp. Dan. ix. 26), marks 
the connexion of Christians with their 
Head. As He was ‘anointed’ for His 
office (Luke iv. 18 [Is. lxi. 1]; Acts iv. 
27 [Ps. ii. 2]; x. 38; Heb. i. 9 [Ps. xlv. 
7]); 80 too are they (2 Cor. i.21f.). The 
verb ypiw (answering to MY) in Lxx. 
is employed generally, though not ex- 
clusively, of the anointing of things 
for sacred use. In the New Testament 
it is found only in the places quoted 
above, and thus always of the impart- 
ment of a divine grace. 

Here the outward symbol of the 
OldTestament—thesacred oil—is used 
to signify the gift of the Spirit from 
the Holy One which is the character- 
istic endowment of Christians. This 
gift is referred to a definite time (Ὁ. 


καὶ οἴδατε πάντα S. See Additional Note. 


27 ὃ ἐλάβετε); and the narrative of the 
Acts fixes this normally at the im- 
position of hands which followed on 
Baptism (Acts viii. 14 ff.). But the 
context shews that the word χρίσμα is 
not to be understood of the material 
sign, but of the corresponding spiritual 
reality. There is not indeed any evi- 
dence to shew that ‘the chrism’ was 
used at confirmation in the first age. 
Perhaps, as has been suggested, St 
John’s language here may have tend- 
ed to fix the custom, which represent- 
ed the communication of the divine 
grace in an outward rite. Tertullian 
speaks of the custom as habitual in 
his time: Egressi de lavacro perun- 
gimur benedicta unctione de pristina 
disciplina, qua ungi oleo de cornu in 
sacerdotium solebant (de Bapt. 7). 

Unctio spiritualis ipse Spiritus Sanc- 
tus est cujus sacramentum est in unc- 
tione visibili (Bede). 

This ‘unction,’ this gift of the Spirit, 
is said to come finally (ἀπὸ, see c. i. 5, 
note) from the Holy One. The title 
is chosen with direct reference to the 
gift, for all hallowing flows from ‘the 
Holy One,’ but in itself it is ambigu- 
ous, and has been understood of God 
(the Father) and of Christ. In sup- 
port of the former view reference is 
made to 1 Cor. vi. 19; John xiv. 16; 
comp. Baruch iv. 22, 37; but ὁ ἅγιος 
seems to be more naturally referred to 
Christ; Apoe. iii.7; John vi. 69; Acts 
iii. 14; iv. 27, 30; and Christ Himself 
‘sends’ the Paraclete (John xvi. 7). 

οἴδατε πάντες] ye all know, i.e. the 
Truth. If this reading be adopted 
the statement must be taken in close 
connexion with the clause which fol- 
lows: ‘ye all know—TI have not written 
to you because ye do not know—the 
Truth” With οἴδατε τὴν ad. contrast 
2 John 2 of ἐγνωκότες τὴν ad. 


74 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


ΠῚ. 22 


a - Α ᾿ς » of 
ὑμῖν ὅτι οὐκ οἴδατε τὴν ἀλήθειαν, GAN ὅτι οἴδατε 
᾿ - - σῷ ΄ > 
αὐτήν, καὶ ὅτι πᾶν ψεῦδος ἐκ τῆς ἀληθείας οὐκ 


sf 
εστιν. 


2 3 © t > \ ¢ > 
=Tis ἐστιν ὁ ψεύστης εἰ μὴ ὁ ap- 


24ι - πᾶν Ο. 


The common reading καὶ οἴδατε 
πάντα gives an explanation of the ac- 
tual force of χρίσμα ἔχετε : ‘ye have an 
unction, and, in virtue of that gift of 
the Holy Spirit, ye know all things ; 
ye have poteutially complete and cer- 
tain knowledge: no false teaching can 
deceive you if ye are faithful to your- 
selves.” Comp. τ. 27; Jude ς (εἰδότας 
ἅπαξ πάντα); John xiv. 26, xvi. 13. 

See Additional Note. 

21. The object of the Apostle in 
writing was not to communicate fresh 
knowledge, but to bring into active 
and decisive use the knowledge which 
his readers already possessed. For 
ἔγραψα see tv. 14 note, 26. 

ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι... καὶ ὅτι... sed quast 
scientibus...et guoniam...(sed quia... 
quia) V., but because...and because... 
The ὅτε in the second clause appears 
to be coordinated with that in the 
first clause. St John gives two grounds 
for his writing : 

1. Because his readers know the 
truth. 

2. Because no lie is of the truth. 

The first witnesses to the necessary 
sympathy between writer and readers: 
the second explains the occasion of 
the particular warning. 

The second ὅτε can however also be 
translated ‘that’ thus defining a se- 
cond feature in Christian knowledge : 
‘ye know the truth and know that no 
lie is of the truth” In this case the 
words indicate the practical conse- 
quences which follow from the revela- 
tion of the antichrists. 

According to both views the abso- 
lute irreconcileableness of any false- 
hood with ‘the Truth’ is laid down as 
a clear rule for the protection of Chris- 
tians in the presence of seductive 
teachers. It was, on the other hand, 


the office of the Paraclete to guide 
them ‘into all the Truth’ (John xvi. 
13). 

πᾶν Ψ....οὐκ ἔστιν] see δ. 19 note. 

ψεῦδος) mendacium V. Error is 
regarded in its positive form as part 
of ‘the lie’ (τὸ ψεῦδος) which is the 
opposite of ‘the Truth.” Compare 
John viii. 44; 2 Thess. ii. 11; Rom. 
i. 25; Eph. iv. 25. See also Apoc. 
xxi. 27, xxii. 15. 

ἐκ τῆς aX. οὐκ ἔστιν] Cc. 111. 19; John 
xviii. 37. See Ὁ. 16 note. The source of 
falsehood is marked in John viii. 44. 


2. The essence and the power of 
the Truth (22—25). 


The mention of ‘lies’ in Ὁ. 21 leads 
directly to the question as to the 
essential character of him who main- 
tains them, and by contrast of him 
who holds the Truth (22, 23). Then 
follows the portraiture of the power 
of the Truth firmly held, which brings 
fellowship with God, even eternal life 
(24, 25). 

22Who its the liar but he that 
denieth that Jesus is the Christ ? 
This is the Antichrist, even he that 
denieth the Father and the Son. 
23 Every one that denieth the Son hath 
not ecen the Father: he that con- 
Jesseth the Son hath the Father also. 
As for you, let that which ye 
heard from the beginning abide in 
you. If that abide in you which 
ye heard from the beginning, ye also 
shall abide in the Son and in the 
Father. “5 And this is the promise 
that he himself promised us, ecen 
the life eternal, 

22. τίς ἐστιν... Quis est mendax 
wf V. Who is the liar...? The 
abrupt question (comp. c. v. 5) corre- 
sponds with a brief mental pause after 


11. 22] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 75 


, df - " ἘΝ 
νούμενος ὅτι ᾿Ιησοῦς οὐκ ἔστιν ὁ χριστός; οὗτός 


᾽ ς > t td A td 
ἐστιν ὁ ἀντίχριστος, ὁ ἀρνούμενος τὸν πατέρα καὶ τὸν 


Ὁ. 21. ‘I have spoken of lies: what, 
nay rather, «cho is their source? Who 
is the liar?? The abruptness of ov. 
22 f. is remarkable. Clause stands 
by clause in stern solemnity without 
any connecting particles. 

6 ψεύστης] the liar, who offers in 
his own person the sum of all that is 
false ; and not simply ‘a liar’ who is 
guilty of a particular sin. The denial 
of the fact ‘Jesus is the Christ’ when 
grasped in its full significance—intel- 
lectual, moral, spiritual—includes all 
falsehood: it reduces all knowledge 
of necessity to a knowledge of phe- 
nomena: it takes away the highest 
ideal of sacrifice: it destroys the 
connexion of God and man. 

τίς...«εἰ μή] ο. ν᾿ 5; 1 Cor. fi, 11; 
2 Cor. ii. 2, &c. 

ὁ ἀρνούμενος ὅτι... οὐκ ἔστιν] that 
denieth that... The insertion of the 
negative in the original (preserved in 
the Old Latin, gui negat quod Jesus 
non est Christus) gives a positive, 
aggressive, character to the negation. 
The adversary denies that Jesus is 
the Christ when the claim is made; 
and on his own part he affirms that 
He is not. Comp. Luke xx. 27; Gal. 
y. 7; Heb. xii. 19. For the converse 
see John i. 20. 

The phrase by which St John de- 
scribes the master-falsehood as the 
‘denial that Jesus is the Christ,’ 
itself marks the progress of Christian 
thought. In the earliest stage of the 
Church the words would have ex- 
pressed a denial of the Messiahship 
of Jesus from the Jewish point of 
view (Acts v. 42, ix. 22, xvii. 3, 
xviii. 28). They now answer to a 
later form of opinion, A common 
‘Gnostic’ theory was that ‘the son 
Christ’ descended upon the man 
Jesus at His Baptism, and left Him 
before the Passion. Those who held 


such a doctrine denied that ‘Jesus 
was the Christ’; and in so denying, 
denied the union of the divine and 
human in one Person. This heresy 
then St John signalises here, the 
direct contradiction to the funda- 
mental truth which he proclaimed, 
the Word became flesh. 

οὗτος] this liar, this maintainer of 
the central falsehood in regard to 
revelation, as to God and man, is the 
antichrist, even he that denieth the 
Father and the Son. The denial of 
the personal union of true manhood 
and true Godhead in Christ involves 
the denial of the essential relations 
of Fatherhood and Sonship in the 
Divine Nature. The conception of 
this relation in the immanent Trinity 
prepares the way for the fact of the 
Incarnation; and conversely, the fact 
of the Incarnation gives reality to 
that moral conception of God as 
active Love without which Theism 
becomes a formula. 

ὁ ἀντίχριστος] The term expresses 
the embodiment of a principle, and 
is not to be confined to one person. 
The character of ‘the antichrist’ is 
described in the words which follow 
(even he that...Son), which are not 
simply a resumption of οὗτος. 

ὁ ἀρνούμενος τ. 1.) To deny the 
Father is to refuse to acknowledge 
God as Father. Comp. Matt. x. 33; 
Acts iii. 13 f.; 2 Tim. ii. 12; 2 Pet. ii. 
1; Jude 4. 

τὸν πατέρα] The title the Father 
oceurs in the Epistles of St John, as 
in the Gospel, in connexion with ‘the 
Son’ (vv. 22, 23, 24, i. 3, iv. 14; 2d. 
3, 9), and in relation to men (ii. 1, 14, 
15 ἢ, iii, 1; 2 J. 4) in virtue of the 
revelation of Christ. It is used also 
in relation to ‘the Life’ (i. 2 note). 

The title always stands in the Epi- 
stles in its simple form. ‘His Father’ 


76 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


ΠῚ. 23, 24 


“~ \ δ \ ‘ , wt 
υἱόν. “Ξπᾶς ὁ ἀρνούμενος τὸν υἱὸν οὐδὲ τὸν πατερα EXEL. 


ς 


23 ὁ ὁμολ....ἔχει SABC me syrr. 


cod \ \ A ΄ of 
ὁ ὁμολογῶν τὸν υἱὸν καὶ TOV πατέρα EXEL. 


om. S. 


- a 
4°Yueis ὃ 


24 ὑμεῖς SABC vg: ὑμ.- οὖν ς΄. 


Other conjunctions are inserted in versions. 


or ‘our Father, or ‘the Father in 
heaven’ do not occur. See Additional 
Note on i. 2. 

τὸν υἱόν] By the use of the absolute 
term the Son (comp. John v. 19 note), 
which occurs in the Epistle first here 
(comp. iv. 14, v. 12), St John brings out 
distinctly what is involved in the fact 
that the Christ and Jesus are person- 
ally one. There is no passage in the 
mind of the Apostle from one per- 
sonality to another, from the human 
to the divine, nor yet from the con- 
ception of ‘the man Christ Jesus’ to 
that of ‘the Word’: the thought of 
‘the Son’ includes both these con- 
ceptions in their ideal fulness. 

23. πᾶς ὁ ἀρν. τ. vi....] Qui negat 
Filium nec Patrem habet V. The 
original‘ is compressed: Erery one 
that denieth the Son hath not even 
the Father (οὐδὲ τ. π. 2.) or, according 
to our idiom, No one that denieth the 
Son hath even the Father. Such a 
one hath not the Son, whom he re- 
jects, nor yet the Father, whom he 
professes to regard. The translation 
quoted by Augustine completes the 
sentence: gui negat Filium nec 
Filium nec Patrem habet. 

The ‘denial of the Son’ expresses 
in another form that which has been 
more fully described before as ‘the 
denial of Jesus as the Christ.’ 

The denial of the Son involves the 
loss of the Father, not only because the 
ideas of sonship and fatherhood are 
correlative, but because the Son alone 
can reveal the Father (Matt. xi. 27; 
John xiv. 9), and it is, in other words, 
only in the Son that we have the 
revelation of God as Father. 

The οὐδέ retains its full force ‘has 
not even the Father, though this re- 
sult may seem to be against expecta- 


tion, and contrary to the claim of the 
false teachers. Comp. John v. 22, 
viii. 42; Gal. ii. 3; 1 Tim. vi. 7. 

For the use of was ὁ dpv. in place of 
the simple ὁ ἀρν. see 6. iii. 3 note. 

οὐδὲ ἔχει...ἔχει)] hath not even... 
hath... The second clause in each 
case is more than a simple repetition 
of the first (comp. Wisd. x. 8). It is 
not said of him ‘that denieth the Son’ 
that he denieth the Father also; but 
that he ‘hath not even the Father.’ 
Such a man might shrink from deny- 
ing the Father in words, and even 
claim to do Him honour, but yet 
St John says ‘he hath not even the 
Father, as one who enjoys the certain 
possession of 4 living Friend. And 
conversely he ‘that confesseth the 
Son’ not only confesses the Father 
in an act of faith, but also lives in 
conscious communion with Him. 

ἔχει] Comp. v. 12; 2 John 9. 

Augustine has an interesting dis- 
cussion on the application of the test 
to Catholics and Donatists. His con- 
clusion is: ‘Quisquis factis negat 
Christum Antichristus est, adding 
the words quoted on v. 19. And Bede 
says of this confession: confessionem 
hic cordis vocis et operis inquirit qua- 
lem queerebat Paulus (1 Cor. xii. 3). 

ὁ ὁμολογῶν τὸν υἱόν] gui confite- 
tur Filium V., he that confesseth the 
Son, he that openly acknowledges that 
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. 
The constructions of ὁμολογεῖν in N.Y. 
are numerous. The simplest are those 
with the infin. and with ὅτε which 
serve for the affirmation of a definite 
fact past, present or future (insin. 
c. iv. 2; Tit. i 16; Matt. xiv. 7; ὅτι 
c. iv. 15; John i. 20; Acts xxiv. 14; 
Heb. xi. 13). From the construction 
with the iin. that with the accus. 


II, 24] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 77 


? , > Κ᾿ ~ a , A ΄ 

ἠκούσατε ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς, ἐν ὑμῖν μενέτω: ἐὰν ἐν ὑμῖν μείνη 
a ee ? sas) > ‘ \ € - 2 st ca \ » Ξ 
ὁ ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς ἠκούσατε, καὶ ὑμεῖς ἐν τῷ υἱῷ καὶ [ἐν] 


ἀκηκόατε (bis) &. 
ἐν τῷ π. καὶ ἐν τῷ υἱῷ νὰ syr vg. 


follows, either a simple accus. Acts 
xxiii. 8 (comp. c. i. 9); or an accus. 
with a secondary predicate 2 John 7; 
John ix. 22. Here and ine. iv. 3 the 
predicate which gives the substance 
of the confession is supplied from the 
context. Elsewhere the verb is used 
absolutely: John xii. 42; with cogn. 
accus. I Tim. vi. 12; with the sub- 
stance of the confession added in the 
direct: Rom. x. 9 (Κύριος Ἰησοῦς). 
More remarkable is the construction 
with ἐν Matt. x. 31 f.; Luke xii 8, 
which suggests the idea of an ac- 
knowledged fellowship. 

To know the Son as Son is to have 
such knowledge as we can have at 
present of the Father (John xiv. 7 ff.). 
Hence he that confesseth the Son 
hath the Father also as well as the 
Son whom he directly acknowledges. 

24f. The view of the true nature 
of the confession and denial of Christ 
is followed by a view of the power 
of the confession. The knowledge to 
which it witnesses carries with it 
eternal life. 

24. ‘Ypets...] As for you... The 
pronoun stands at the head of the 
sentence in contrast with the false 
teachers of whom the Apostle has 
spoken (v. 22): comp. Matt. xiii, 18. 
For the irregular construction see Ὁ. 
27; John vi. 39; vii. 38; xiv. 12; xv. 
2; Luke xxi. 6, &e. 

The construction is broken, because 
the thought of St John is turned from 
that which the disciples had to do to 
that which was done for them. ‘As 
for you, do you keep’ is changed to 
“As for you, let that abide in you.’ 
The final strength of the Christian 
lies not in his own effort, but in the 
Truth by which he is inspired. That 
is the power of life which he is charged 


ὃ ἀπ' dpx. ἀκηκ. & (vg) mg the. 


év rg πο NAC: -- ἐν Β vg. 


not to hinder. Comp. John xv. 7. For 
the double divine fellowship, ‘God in 
us, we in God,’ see iv. 15 note. 

ὃ ἠκούσατε...) that which ye 
heard...(v. 7). The first simple mes- 
sage of the Gospel apprehended in its 
unity (6 not ἅ; comp. John xiv. 23). 
This ‘word’ taken into the heart be- 
comes a power fashioning the whole 
man (John viii, 31 ἢ; xv. 7). 

ἐν ὑμῖν μενέτω] let that...abide in 
you. The Gospel is described both as 
a medium in which the believer lives 
(John viii. 31), and as a quickening 
spirit which dwells in him (Col. iii. 
16; 2 John 2). 

ὃ ἠκ. ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς...ὃ ἀπ᾿ dpy. ἠκ....] 
The change of order marks a change 
of emphasis. In the first clause the 
stress lies on the fact that the read- 
ers had received a divine message 
(ye heard): in the second, on the 
coincidence of that message in time 
with the origin of their faith (from 
the beginning). Comp. iii 8 note. 

καὶ ὑμεῖς... ye also...i.e. ‘then ye 
on your side...’ not ‘ye as well as 
others...” The presence of the divine 
life carries with it of necessity the 
possession of divine fellowship. Thus 
one fact is correlative to the other 
(comp. i. 3). This correlation is made 
clearer by the correspondence in the 
pronouns: ἐὰν ἐν wvpiv...cal ὑμεῖς. 
Comp. iii. 24. 

For the use of καί to mark a cor- 
responding issue, see iv. II. 

ἐν τῷ vig καὶ ἐν τ. 7.] The order, as 
contrasted with that in Ὁ. 22 (τ. π. καὶ 
τ. vi), is Significant. Here the thought 
is that of rising through the con- 
fession of the Son to the knowledge of 
the Father; there the thought is of 
the issue of denial culminating in the 
denial of the Father. 


78 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


- ἢ τς 
τω πατρι MEVELTE, 


a 
νιον. 
25 ἡμῖν : ὑμῖν Β (lat). 


25. καὶ αὕτη ἐστίν...1 And this is... 
The pronoun may refer either to that 
which precedes or to that which fol- 
lows. The promise may be that of 
abiding communion with the Father 
and the Son (John xvii. 21), which is 
explained by the words added in ap- 
position ‘the life eternal’; or it may 
be simply ‘the life eternal.’ In either 
case ‘the life eternal’ consists in union 
with God by that knowledge which is 
sympathy (John xvii. 3), so that there 
is no real difference of sense in the 
two interpretations. The usage of 
St John in the Epistle is decidedly in 
favour of the second view (i. 5, iii. 23, 
y. 11, 14), nor is there any sufficient 
reason for departing from it. 

ἐπαγγελία] repromissio V., polli- 
citatio Aug. This is the only place 
where the word occurs in the writings 
of St John (not c. i. 5). Contrast 
ἐπάγγελμα (promissum V.) 2 Pet. i. 4; 
iii. 13. 

ἣν αὐτός... that He... He himself, 
Christ our Master. The nom. (αὐτός) 
is always emphatic: see v. 2 note. 
There is not any special saying of the 
Lord recorded in which this promise 
is expressly contained (yet comp. 
James i. 12; Apoc. ii. 10); but it was 
the whole aim and scope of His 
teaching to lead men to seek ‘life.’ 
And a divine charge is a divine 
promise. 

τὴν ζ. τὴν αἰ. Seec. 1. 2 note. For 
the attraction compare Phil. iii. 18. 
Winer, p. 665. 

3. Abiding in the Truth (ii.26—29). 

The view which St John has given 
of the nature and power of the Truth 
is followed by a fresh application of 
the teaching to the readers of the 
Epistle. An affirmation (μένετε, indic., 


[II. 25, 26 


25,-) ? ‘ a) , 

καὶ αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἐπαγγελία 

> \ ? / con \ A \ af 

ἣν αὐτὸς ἐπηγγείλατο ἡμῖν, τὴν ζωὴν τὴν αἰω- 
26 ΄ at com \ ae 

Ταῦτα ἔγραψα ὑμῖν περὶ τῶν πλα- 


46 ταῦτα -ἰ δέ τὲ syrvg. 


τ. 27) leads to a command (μένετε, 
imper., v. 28). Thus the paragraph 
falls into two parts which deal (1) 
with the divine teaching as perma- 
nent and progressive (vv. 26 f.) and 
(2) with human effort directed to the 
future (vz. 28 f.). 

26 These things have I written to 
you concerning them that would lead 
you astray. 77 And as for you, the 
unction which ye received from him 
abideth in you, and ye have no need 
that any one teach you; but as his 
unction teacheth you of all things 
(and it is true and is no lie), and 
even as it taught you, ye abide in 
him, 

2 And now, little children, abide 
in him, that, if he shall be manifested, 
we may have boldness and not shrink 
in shame from him at his presence. 
29 If ye know that he is righteous, 
know (notice) that every one that doeth 
righteousness hath been begotien of 
him. 

26f. In the preceding verses (vv. 
24 f.) St John had appealed to the 
original apostolic message which his 
readers had received (ὃ ἠκούσατε) in 
contrast with all false teaching. He 
now appeals to the inward voice of the 
Spirit whose first teaching (ἐδίδαξεν) 
and whose present teaching (διδάσκει) 
is one. 

26. Ταῦτα] These things, the clear 
unfolding of the true character and 
significance of the false teachers in 
relation to the Church (vv. 18—25). 

ἔγραψα) See σ. 14 note. 

τῶν πλανώντων) gut seducunt vos 
V., them that would lead you astray, 
who are actively engaged in the effort: 
6. iii. 7; Apoe. xiii. 14, xii. 9. 

St John has spoken of the false 


IL. 27] 


, cod 
νώντων ὑμᾶς. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 79 


\ € - A , ca 
"καὶ ὑμεῖς TO χρίσμα ὃ ἐλάβετε ἀπ᾽ 


3 a. f 2 “ ἡ A wv 
αὐτοῦ μένει ἐν ὑμῖν, Kal οὐ χρείαν ἔχετε ἵνα τις διδάσκη 
cos, A ὰ é ‘ « , , a Ὲ 
ὑμᾶς: ἀλλ᾽ ὡς τὸ αὐτοῦ χρίσμα διδάσκει ὑμᾶς περὶ 


27 χρίσμα (1): χάρισ μα Β. 
μενέτω Vg. 
syr hl.: τὸ αὐτό SA me. 


teachers under their spiritual aspect 
as ‘antichrists’; he now speaks of 
them under their outward aspect as 
leading men away from the fellowship 
of the Christian Society. 

27. καὶ ὑμεῖς... And as for you... 
The construction is like that in Ὁ. 24. 
The pronoun is set at the head of the 
sentence in order to bring out sharply 
the contrast between believers and 
their adversaries. 

τὸ χρίσμα] Ὁ. 20 note. 

ὃ ἐλάβ. ἀ, αὐ. which ye received 
JSrom την ‘the Holy One’ (v. 20), even 
Christ (v. 25). The gift which before 
(Ὁ. 20) was simply described as a pos- 
session (¢yere) is now referred to its 
source. The personal relation to which 
it witnesses is a ground of confidence. 

ἐλάβ. ἀπ᾽ av.) The use of ἀπό to 
mark the source in this connexion has 
been already touched on (c. 1. 5). The 
distinction of the ‘source’ (ἀπό) and 
the ‘giver’ (παρά) is illustrated by 
the combination of the prepositions 
ἀπό and παρά with different verbs: 

(1) λαμβάνειν παρά John v. 41, 44; 
x. 18; 2 John 4; Apoe. ii 27; Mk. xii. 
2; Acts ii. 33; iii. 5; xvii. 9; xx. 24; 
James i. 7; 2 Pet. i. 17. λαμβάνειν 
ἀπό τ John iii. 22; 3 John 7; Matt. 
xvii. 25. 

(2) παραλαμβάνειν παρά τ Thess. ii. 
13; ἵν. 1; 2 Thess. iii 6; Gal. i. 12; 
παραλαμβάνειν ἀπό τ Cor. xi. 23. 

(3) ἔχειν παρά Acts ix. 14. ἔχειν 
ἀπό ¢. ii. 20; iv. 21; 1 Tim. 111. 7. 
ἔχειν ἐκ τ Cor. vii. 7; 2 Cor. v. 1. 

For ἀκούειν παρά, ἀπό see 6. i. 5 
note. 

μένει] abideth. The apostle so writes 
as looking at the divine side of the 


μέν. ἐν bu. NABC vg me the: ἐν ὑμ. μέν. ς΄: 
ἀλλ᾽ ὡς NAC ve the: ἀλλά Β. 


τὸ αὐτοῦ NBC vg the 


χρίσμα (2): πνεῦμα N* me (χρεῖσμα B). 


truth. The gifts of God are sure on 
His part. 

οὐ χρείαν éy....] ye have no need... 
The outpouring of the Spirit, the 
characteristic of the last days (Jer. 
xxxi. 34; Joel ii. 28; Heb. viii. 11; 
Acts ii. 17 ff.), gave to each one who 
received it a sure criterion of truth. 
Christians needed not fresh teaching 
even from apostles, still less from those 
who professed to guide them into 
new ‘depths.’ 

ov xp. ἔχ. va...] non necesse habetis 
ut V., non habetis necessitatem ut 
Aug. The same construction occurs in 
John ii. 25, xvi. 30. The phrase χρείαν 
ἔχειν is used absolutely in several 
places: Mk. ii. 25; Acts ii. 45, iv. 35; 
1 Cor. xii. 24; Eph. iv. 28, as in this 
Epistle c. iii. 17. This usage supplies 
a probable explanation of the con- 
struction: ‘Ye are not in need such 
that you require....’ 

ἀλλ’ ὡς... καὶ καθὼς...ἐν αὐτῷ] but 
as His unction teacheth you...and 
even as tt taught you, ye abide in Him. 
These words serve to establish the 
statement just made. ‘You need no 
one to teach you, but on the contrary 
you remain firm in that direct divine 
fellowship established by the teaching 
which you are continually receiving 
and which at first you received once 
for all’ Impatience drives men to 
look without for the guidance which 
in due time will be recognised within. 
Such impatience is the opposite to 
the steadfastness of the Christian. 

But while so much is clear the con- 
struction of the sentence is uncertain. 
The last clause (and even as...in 
Him) may be either a resumption or 


80 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN, 


[II. 27 


"ἡ ~ \ 
πάντων, καὶ ἀληθές ἐστιν καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ψεῦδος, καὶ 


47 ἀληθής &. 


rather a continuation of the former 
words (as His...no lie), or a new and 
distinct clause. In the latter case the 
first apodosis will be in the words ‘so 
is it true and no lie? ‘but as His 
unction teacheth you, even so is it 
true and no lie.” This use of καὶ in 
the apodosis is however rare in St 
John; nor does there appear to be 
any special force in making the affir- 
mation of the perfect truth of the 
divine teaching a substantive con- 
clusion. It is therefore more natural 
to suppose that there is only one 
apodosis (ye abide in Hint), and that 
the sentence as originally shaped (δέ, 
on the contrary, as His unction teach- 
eth you concerning all things, ye 
abide in Him) was afterwards en- 
larged by the addition of the reflec- 
tion ‘and it is true and is no lie; 
which again led to the further state- 
ment that the present progressive 
teaching is essentially the same as the 
first teaching as His unction teach- 
eth...and even as it taught you, ye 
abide in Him. 

The reading of B gives a plain and 
simple sense, but it is difficult to under- 
stand how it could have been altered 
if it had been the original reading. 

τὸ av. xp.) His unction, the unc- 
tion which ye received from Christ. 
Comp. John xvi. 7. 

The most unusual order τὸ av. yp. 
(for τὸ yp. av.) throws a strong empha- 
sis on the pronoun. Comp. 1 Thess. 
ii. 19 (contrast 1 Cor. xv. 23; 2 Cor. 
vii. 7); Rom. iii. 24 (in 2 Pet. iii. 7 
τῷ αὐτοῦ A. is probably a false read- 
ing). As might be expected this is 
the normal order with ἐκεῖνος : John 
v.47; 2 Pet. i. 16; 2 Cor. viii. 9, 14; 
2 Tim. 11. 26; Tit. iii. 7. 

68. ὑ. π. π.] teacheth you of all 
things. The application and inter- 
pretation of the truth is continuous, 


καὶ καθώς: om. καὶ A the. 


The Spirit of Truth sent in Christ’s 
name (John xiv. 26), sent, that is, to 
make the meaning of the Incarnation 
fully known, is ever bringing out 
something more of the infinite mean- 
ing of His Person and Work, in con- 
nexion with the new results of thought 
and observation (περὶ πάντων). Comp. 
John xvi. 13 f. 

καὶ ἀληθές ἐστιν...} and it is true... 
The ‘unction,’ the gift of the Spirit, 
is now identified with the results of 
the gift. The Spirit is the Spirit of 
Truth (John xiv. 17); and its teaching 
is true, and admits no element of 
falsehood (v. 21). 

Parenthetical reflections like this 
are found elsewhere in St John’s 
writings. Comp. c. i. 2 note. 

οὐκ ἔ. ψεῦδος) non est mendacium 
V., is no lie. By the use of ψεῦδος 
(not ψευδές) St John implies that the 
false teachers practically represented 
the Gospel as ‘a lie’ in its concrete 
form, and not simply as ‘false’ (comp. 
©. 21 note). 

The combination of the positive and 
negative is characteristic of St John: 
i. 5 note. 

καὶ καθὼς ἐδίδαξεν... and even as it 
taught.... The first teaching contained 
implicitly all that is slowly brought to 
light in later times (comp. ii. 7). The 
believer abides in Christ as the Spirit 
makes Him known, and even as it 
made Him known in the simple Gospel 
‘Jesus is the Christ. This clause ex- 
cludes all ‘developments’ of teaching 
which cannot be shewn to exist in 
germ in the original message; and 
at the same time leaves no room for 
the inventions of fanaticism. That 
which was taught first is the absolute 
standard. 

The use of καθώς marks this idea of 
a definite and fixed standard: ov. 6, 
18, iii. 2, 3, 7, 12, &e. 


II. 28] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 81 


\ 3) P ἅς, ‘ 5 om ~ 
καθὼς ἐδίδαξεν ὑμᾶς, μένετε ἐν αὐτῷ. "Καὶ νῦν, 
, ΄ ? ? ~ .« aX an ΄ 
τεκνία 
εκνία, μένετε ἐν αὐτῷ, ἵνα ἐὰν φανερωθῇ σχῶμεν παρ- 


μένετε ΒΟ vg syrr me the: μενεῖτε ς΄. 


ἵνα ἐάν NABC the: ἵνα ὅταν ς΄ syrr. 


μένετε ἐν αὐτῷ] ye abide in Him, 
1.6. Christ. The verb may be indi- 
cative or imperative (as in Ὁ. 28, so 
Vulg. manete in 60), but the pa- 
rallelism with μένει (the unction abid- 
eth...ye abide) is decisive in favour of 
the indicative. In this verse St John 
assumes the fulfilment of the con- 
ditions which he presses upon his 
readers in Ὁ. 28. 

For the general thought compare 
John vi. 56, xv. 4 ff. Elsewhere the 
Christian is said to ‘abide in God’: 
lil. 24, iv. 12 ff So in vv. 28 f. ‘Christ’ 
and ‘God’ are treated as interchange- 
able. 

At first sight it might appear most 
natural to take ἐν αὐτῷ of the ‘ teach- 
ing of the Spirit’ (χρίσμα) as is done 
by the Latin translation used by 
Augustine (permanete in ipsa 86. 
unctione) according to John viii. 31 ; 
but the personal reference cannot be 
questioned in v. 28, and that must de- 
cide the interpretation here. Christ— 
God in Christ—is the subject con- 
stantly present to the mind of the 
Apostle. 

Augustine contrasts finely the hu- 
man and divine teachers: Sonus ver- 
borum nostrorum aures_percutit, 
magister intus est. Nolite putare 
quemquam hominem aliquid discere 
ab homine. Admonere possumus per 
strepitum vocis nostre ; si non sit in- 
tus qui doceat inanis fit strepitus 
noster.... Magisteria forinsecus ad- 
jutoria queedam sunt et admonitiones. 
Cathedram in czelo habet qui corda 
docet. 

28 f. St John turns from the ideal 
view of the believer to the practical 
enforcement of duty: ‘I have said 
that God’s gift is unchangeable ; and 
that the Christian continues living in 


W. J. 


28 -- καὶ νῦν.. αὐτῷ &. 


σχῶμεν NSABC: ἔχωμεν ς΄ δὲ". 


that which he received, and so abides 
in his Lord; and now, in the face of 
your enemies, realise your life: do 
you abide in Him, and prove your fel- 
lowship by your action,’ 

The verses serve also to prepare 
the way for the next section, intro- 
ducing ideas which are afterwards de- 
veloped (φανεροῦσθαι, παρρησίαν ἔχειν, 
ποιεῖν τὴν δικ., γεγεννῆσθαι ἐξ αὐτοῦ). 

28. καὶ νῦν... And now... For this 
connexion see John xvii. 5; 2 John 
5; Acts iii. 17, x. 5, xiii, 11, xx. 25, 
xxii. 16. 

texvia] filioli V., my litile children. 
The tenderness of the address (rexvia) 
commends the charge. 

ἐν αὐτῷ] in Him, i.e. in Christ, Ὁ. 27. 

ἐὰν φανερωθῇ] cum apparuerit V., 
cum manifestatus fuerit Aug., if he 
shall be manifested, c. iii. 2. The hy- 
pothetic form does not throw doubt 
upon the fact in itself (see v. 29), but 
marks the uncertainty of the circum- 
stances under which the fact will be 
realised: the manifestation might be 
while they all still lived. Comp. John 
xxi. 22 f; α. iv. 17 ἐν τῇ ἡμ. τῆς κρί- 
σεως. 

The same word φανερωθῆναι is used 
for the first manifestation of the Lord 
in the flesh (c. i. 2, iii. 5, 8; 1 Tim. iii. 
16; 1 Pet. i. 20); and for that mani- 
festation which ‘is still looked for (ec. 
iii. 2; Col. iii: 4; 1 Pet. v. 4). It is 
used also for the manifestations of the 
Risen Lord ((Mark] xvi. 12, 14; John 
xxi, 14 (1)), and for His ‘manifesta- 
tion to Israel’ (John i. 31: comp. vii. 


4). 

ἢ is worthy of notice that St John 
nowhere uses ἀποκαλύπτεσθαι of the 
revelation of Christ. 

σχῶμεν παρρ.] we may... St John 
again identifies himself with his 


6 


82 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[II. 29 


ρησίαν καὶ μὴ αἰσχυνθώμεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ παρουσίᾳ 


αὐτοῦ. 


9 ἐὰν εἰδῆτε ὅτι δίκαιος ἐστιν, γινώσκετε ὅτι 


πᾶς ὁ ποιῶν τὴν δικαιοσύνην ἐξ αὐτοῦ γεγέννηται. 


28 ἐν τῇ παρ. ἀ. ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ &. 


29 εἰδῆτε NBC vg syrr: ἴδητε A me. 


πᾶς B me syr hl: ér¢-+«al’ πᾶς NAC the syr vg. 


children: comp. v.-1. All form one 
body. It is possible to understand 
the words as referring to the Apostle’s 
joy in the crown of his work (comp. 
1 Thess. ii. 19 f.; Phil. iv. 1), The 
parallel with 1 Thess. ii. 19 f. is cer- 
tainly close; but it seems to be more 
natural to suppose that the apostle 
made himself one with those who 
shared his life, and the absence of 
the personal pronoun seems to exclude 
the notion of any contrast between 
him and them. 

The use of ἔχειν παρρησίαν (c. iii, 
21, iv. 17, v. 14; comp. Heb. iii. 6, 
x. 19; Phil. 8) in connexion with the 
manifestation of Christ suggests St 
Paul’s thought of the judgment-seat 
of Christ (2 Cor. v. 10) or of God 
(Rom. xiv. 10), where man must 
‘render account’ (Rom. xiv. 12) of his 
life. The idea of open, unreserved 
utterance is never lost. See John vii. 
4 note. The difference in order here 
(ox. wapp.) and in iii. 21, iv. 17 (wapp. 
ἔχειν) indicates a different emphasis 
on the elements of the phrase: comp. 
Eph. iii. 12. 

μὴ αἰσχυνθῶμεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ] non con- 
JSundamur ab eo V., not shrink with 
shame from Him, ‘as a guilty thing 
surprised.” The same thought of 
separation is found more plainly ex- 
pressed 2 Thess, i. 9. The construc- 
tion αἰσχύνεσθαι ἀπό is used in the 
same sense in the ~xx: Is. i. 29; 
Jer. 11. 36, xii. 13 (Ὁ wa); Ecclus. 
xxi. 22, xli. 17 ff. 

παρουσία] adventu V., presence 
(coming). The word does not occur 
elsewhere in St John’s writings. Its 
single occurrence here, where it might 
easily have been omitted, in exactly 


the same sense as it bears in all the 
other groups of apostolic writings 
(Matt., James, 2 Peter, 1, 2 Thess., 1 
Cor.) is a signal example of the danger 
of drawing conclusions from the nega- 
tive phenomena of the books of the 
New Testament. The fact is the more 
worthy of notice as the subject of 
eschatology falls into the background 
in the Gospel and Epistles of St John. 
Comp. John xxi. 22. 

It may be added that St John does 
not use the Pauline word ἐπιφάνεια 
(2 Thess., 1, 2 Tim., Tit.). 

29. ἐὰν eidqre...yuvdaxere...] st scitis 
.. scitote (Vig. Taps. scitis)... V. If 
ye know...perceive, observe, notice... 
Knowledge which is absolute (εἰδῆτε) 
becomes the basis of knowledge which 
is realised in observation (γινώσκετε). 
Comp. John ii. 24 note. The dis- 
tinction is lost in the Latin and can 
hardly be preserved in an English 
version. 

The second verb (γινώσκετε) may be 
either indicative or imperative. Both 
renderings are found in early Latin 
authorities. In favour of the im- 
perative it is urged that it stands be- 
tween two imperatives (μένετε, and 
iii, 1 ere). On the other hand it is 
said that δ. 29 contains a general 
reason for the command in 2. 28. 
‘Abide in Him in fruitful well-doing, 
for the first article of your faith teaches 
you that right action is the sign of a 
divine birth’ 

A decision is difficult; but upon 
the whole the general structure of ve. 
28 f. favours the imperative. It seems 
to be more in accordance with the 
context that St John should here 
charge his readers to apply practi- 


II. 29] 


cally the truth which they had in- 
wardly mastered, than that he should 
appeal to them as having done thus. 

The use of ἐάν with the subj. (ἐὰν 
εἰδῆτε), when there is no intention of 
questioning the fact or treating it as 
uncertain, often serves to turn the 
thoughts of the hearer or reader upon 
it in the way of self-interrogation: 
‘if, as I assume to be the case, as you 
profess, as by silent inquiry you can 
assure yourselves...’ Comp. ὁ. iv. 12 
(v.15); John xiv. 15. 

δίκαιος...ἐξ ad. γεγένν.] He is right- 
eous...begotten of Him.... Great diffi- 
culty has been felt in determining 
whether the pronoun refers to ‘God’ 
or to ‘Christ.’ There can be no doubt 
that Christ is the subject in v. 28 
(abide in Him...at His presence). It 
is therefore most natural to suppose 
that He is the subject in this verse 
also, unless the context makes such 
an interpretation impossible. This 
probability is strengthened by the fact 
that no personal pronoun is introduced 
ine. 29. And there is a further pre- 
sumption that the same subject is 
continued from the fact that in iii. 1 
a new subject is distinctly named (the 
Father). The application of the epi- 
thet ‘righteous’ to Christ is supported 
by τ. 1. But it is argued on the other 
side that the Christian cannot be said 
‘to be born of Christ’ It is certainly 
true that the exact phrase does not 
oceur elsewhere, while ‘to be born of 
God’ (who is called ‘righteous’ ὁ. i. 
Ὁ) is a characteristic phrase of St John 
(yer. ἐκ θεοῦ John i. 13, γενν. ἐκ τοῦ 
θεοῦ ¢. iii.9; iv. 7; γ. 174, 18). But this 
argument does not seem to be con- 
clusive. Christians are said equally 
to ‘abide in God’ and to ‘abide in 
Christ’ (v.27). They are also said to 
be ‘born of the Spirit’ (John iii. 6, 8). 
The word of Christ is in them as a 
quickening power (comp. 1 Pet. i. 23; 
James i. 18). There is then nothing 
against the tenour of Scripture, in 
saying that Christians are ‘born of 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 83 


Christ, who is ‘God only-begotten ’ 
(John i. 18). 

The true solution of the difficulty 
seems to be that when St John thinks 
of God in relation to men he never 
thinks of Him apart from Christ 
(comp. c. v. 20). And again he never 
thinks of Christ in His human na- 
ture without adding the thought of 
His divine nature. Thus a rapid 
transition is possible from the one 
aspect of the Lord’s divine-human 
Person to the other. Here the pas- 
sage is from ‘Christ’ to ‘God’ (ἐὰν 
φανερωθῇ, ἐν τῇ παρουσίᾳ αὐτοῦ, di- 
καιός ἐστιν, ἐξ αὐτοῦ γεγέννηται); and 
conversely in iii, 1-τ4 the passage is 
from ‘God’ to ‘Christ’ (τέκνα θεοῦ, 
οὐκ ἔγνω αὐτόν, ἐὰν φανερωθῇ, ὅμοιοι 
αὐτῷ ἐσόμεθα, καθὼς ἐκεῖνος), yet with- 
out any change of Person. 

This appears to be the view of 
Augustine who writes: ex ipso natus 
est, ex Deo, ex Christo. Bede writes 
simply ‘id est, ex Christo.’ 

δίκαιος] righteous. The epithet is 
used of Christ ii. 1; iii. 7. Comp. 
Acts ili. 14, vii. 52, xxii. 14; and of 
God (the Father) ο. i. 9 (see note); 
John xvii. 25; Apoc. xvi. 5. 

ὅτι πᾶς... γεγέννηται] that every 
one... μα], been begotten of Him. The 
presence of righteous action is the 
sure sign of the reality of the divine 
birth. We are often tempted, ac- 
cording to our imperfect standards of 
judgment, to exclude some (comp. z. 
23 πᾶς ὁ dpv. note), but the divine law 
admits no exception. It must be 
further observed that righteousness is 
not the condition but the consequence 
of Sonship. God is the one source of 
righteousness. Apart from God in 
Christ there is no righteousness. It 
follows therefore that the presence of 
active righteousness is the sign of the 
divine Sonship, and the sign of that 
abiding power of Sonship which brings 
final confidence. Other tests of Son- 
ship are offered in the Epistle : ‘love’ 
(iv. 7) and belief ‘that Jesus is the 


6—2 


84 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Christ’ (v. 1). Each one, it will be 
found, includes the others. See v. 1 
note. 

The apostle’s argument might have 
appeared more direct if the clauses 
had been inverted: ‘know (take note 
of the fact) that every one that is born 
of God doeth righteousness.’ But the 
present order includes a promise, and 
leaves the power of Sonship in its 
amplitude. The outwardly witnessed 
fact of righteousness points to the 
reality of a relation which includes 
blessings not yet fully grasped. 

6 ποιῶν τὴν δικ.] qui facit justi- 
tiam V., who doeth righteousness, who 
realises in action little by little the 
righteousness which corresponds with 
the Divine Nature (τὴν dx. compare 
ο. iii. 7 note). The tense (ποιῶν) is 
full of meaning, as Theophylact ob- 
serves: ἐπισημαντέον ὅτι οὐκ εἶπε Tas 


[II. 29 


ὁ ποιήσας δικαιοσύνην ἢ, Ὃ ποιήσων 
ἀλλ’ ‘O ποιῶν. πρακτικαὶ γὰρ [ai] ἀρε- 
ταὶ καὶ ἐν τῷ γίνεσθαι ἔχουσι τὸ εἶναι" 
παυσάμεναι δὲ ἢ μέλλουσαι οὐδὲ τὸ 
εἶναι ἔχουσι. 

Bede thus marks the begianing and 
the end of this realisation of right- 
eousness: Coepisti non defendere pec- 
catum tuum, jam inchoasti justitiam. 
Perficietur autem in te quando te 
nihil aliud facere delectabit. 

Compare also ποιεῖν τὴν ἀλήθειαν 
c. i. 6 note. 

ἐξ αὐτοῦ γεγέννηται) ex ipso natus 
est V., ts begotten of Him. Comp. 
c. iii. 9 note. The phrase occurs here 
first in the Epistle. The order em- 
phasises the fact that such a one has 
God for his Father, and not that he 
has a new life. Compare iii. 9 ὃ; iv. 
7; Vv. 1; Johni, 13. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 85 


Additional Note on ii. 2. The use of ἱλασμός and cognates in 
the Greek Scriptures. 


: The word ἱλασμός occurs in the N.T. only here and in a parallel passage Use of 
lv. 10. ἱλασμός in 
In the Lxx. it is found with the corresponding ἐξιλασμός more frequently, ae end 
where one or other of the two words is the usual representative of O53: ὶ 
Lev. xxv. 9 ἡ ἡμέρα τοῦ ἱλασμοῦ. ; 
— xxiii. 27 f ἡ ἡμέρα τοῦ ἐξιλασμοῦ. 
Num. v. 8 ὁ κριὸς rod ἱλασμοῦ dv οὗ ἐξιλάσεται. 
— xxix. 11 τὸ περὶ τῆς ἁμαρτίας τῆς ἐξιλάσεως. 
Exod. xxix. 36 ἡ ἡμέρα τοῦ καθαρισμοῦ. 
Vat. A. Σ. ©. ἐξιλασμοῦ. 
— XXX. 10 ἀπὸ τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ καθαρισμοῦ. 
Vat. A. ἐξιλασμοῦ. 
The two words used also for NNN: 
xlv. 19 λήψεται ἀπὸ τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ ἐξιλασμοῦ. 
xliv. 27 προσοίσουσιν ἵλασμόν. 
Comp. Ezek. xliii. 23 (Amos viii. 14 is a false rendering of TDN). 
2 Mace. iii. 33 ποιουμένου τοῦ ἀρχιερέως τὸν ἱλασμόν (the sacrifice offered 
for the recovery of Heliodorus). 
2 Mace, xii. 45 περὶ τῶν τεθνηκότων τὸν ἐξιλασμὸν ἐποιήσατο τῆς ἁμαρτίας 
ἀπολυθῆναι. , 
In Ps. cxxix. (cxxx.) 4 and Dan. ix. 9 ἱλασμός (-of) is used to translate 
mando. 
The words are always used absolutely without any addition to mark the 
person to or for whom, or the offence for which the propitiation is offered. 
In Ecclus. xviii. 12 ἐπλήθυνε (κύριος) τὸν ἐξιλασμὸν αὐτοῦ the sense is that 
of Ps. cxxix. 4 ‘mercifulness.” Comp. ὁ. xvi. 11 ἐξιλασμοί. 
The corresponding verb ἱλάσκομαι is found twice in the N.T.: Use of 
(1) With the dat. of person sinning, ἱλάσκομαι. 
Luke xviii. 13 ἱλάσθητί μοι τῷ ἁμαρτωλῷ. 
(2) With the accus. of the sin, 
Heb. ii. 17 εἰς τὸ ἱλάσκεσθαι τὰς ἁμαρτίας τοῦ λαοῦ. 
Ἱλάσκομαι ig comparatively rare in the Lxx. It occurs as a translation 
of 1B2: 
(1) With accus. of the sin, 
Ps, lxiv. 3 ἱλάσῃ τὰς ἀσεβείας (all. ταῖς do.). 
(2) With dat. of the sin, 
Ps, Ixxvii. 38 ἱλάσεται ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις. 
— Ixxviii. 9 ἱλάσθητι ταῖς dp. : 
It occurs also as a translation of nop for which ἵλεως εἶναι is commonly 
used : 
(1) With the dat. of person, 
4 (2) K. ν. 18 ἱλάσεται [ἱλασθήσεται] τῷ δούλῳ. 


86 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


(2) With the dat. of the sin, 
Ps, xxiv. 12 ἱλάσθητι τῇ ἁμαρτίᾳ. 
(3) Absolutely, 
Lam, iii. 42 οὐχ ἱλάσθης. 
Dan. ix. 19 ἱλάσθητι. 
And once as a translation of D9) which is commonly rendered by 
μετανοεῖν : 
Ex. xxxii. 14 ἱλάσθη κύριος περιποιῆσαι τὸν λαὸν αὐτοῦ. 
The use of the aor. ἱλασθῆναι of God corresponds with the sense of 
ἱλάσκεσθαι, ‘to be propitious, and does not involve the sense ‘to pro- 


pitiate.’ 
ἐξιλάσ- The compound ἐξιλάσκομαι, which is the usual representative of ἼΞ3, 
κομαι. is more common. This is found 


(1) With the accusative 
(a) of the object cleansed : 
Ezek. xliii. 26 τὸ θυσιαστήριον. 
— xiv. 18 τὸ ἅγιον. 
— Σὶν. 20 τὸν οἶκον. 
— xiliii. 20, 22 τὸ θυσιαστήριον (NBN), 
(Ὁ) and specially of sin, 
Dan. ix. 24 τοῦ ἐξιλάσασθαι ἀδικίας. 
Ecclus. iii. 30 ἁμαρτίας. 
Comp. Ps. Isiv. 4. 
In this case the subject (he who expiates, atones, cleanses) may be either 
(a) God, 
Ecclus. v. 6 πλῆθος ἁμαρτιῶν. 
— xxxi. (xxxiv.) 23 οὐδὲ ἐν πλήθει θυσιῶν ἐξιλάσκεται 
ἁμαρτίας, 
or 
(ὃ) the human agent, 
Ecelus. iii. 3 ὁ τιμῶν πατέρα ἐξιλάσεται ἁμαρτίας. 
— Xxx. 28, xxviii. 5. 
So also the word is found in the passive, 
1 Sam. iii. 14 εἰ ἐξιλασθήσεται ἡ adicia...é« θυσίας (Β9}}. 
Comp. Deut. xxi. 8 ἐξιλασθήσεται αὐτοῖς τὸ αἷμα. 
(2) With περί gen. 
(α) of the sin, 
Ex. xxxii. 30, το. 
or 
(Ὁ) of the person sinning, 
Lev. i. 4. 
— iv. 20, &e, 
Comp. Ecclus. xvi. 7 οὐκ ἐξιλάσατο περὶ τῶν ἀρχαίων γιγάντων. 
So also with ὑπέρ, 
Ezek. xlv. 17. 
The word is also used absolutely, 
Lev. xvi. 17. Comp, Lam, iii. 42; Dan. ix. 19. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 87 

(3) Passive with ἀπὸ, 

Num. xxxv. 33 οὐκ ἐξιλασθήσεται ἡ γῆ ἀπὸ τοῦ αἵματος. 

(4) The accusative of the person ‘ propitiated’ is found only, 

Gen. xxxii. 20 (193) ἐξιλάσομαι τὸ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ ἐν τοῖς 
δώροις (for ἐν comp. Levit. vi. 37; 1 Sam. iii. 14). 
Zech. vii. 2 (927) ἐξιλάσασθαι τὸν κύριον. 

These constructions stand in remarkable contrast with the Classical Contrast 
and Hellenistic! usage in which the accus. of the person propitiated is the of Biblical 
normal construction from Homer downwards; a usage which prevails in Ὁ ΝΟΣ 
patristic writers. 

They shew that the scriptural conception of ἱλάσκεσθαι is not that of 
appeasing one who is angry, with a personal feeling, against the offender ; 
but of altering the character of that which from without occasions a neces- 
sary alienation, and interposes an inevitable obstacle to fellowship. Such 
phrases as ‘ propitiating God’ and God ‘being reconciled’ are foreign to the 
language of the N.T. Man is reconciled (2 Cor. v. 18 ff.; Rom. v. ro f.). 
There is a ‘propitiation’ in the matter of the sin or of the sinner. The 
love of God is the same throughout; but He ‘cannot’ in virtue of His very 
Nature welcome the impenitent and sinful: and more than this, He ‘can- 
not’ treat sin as if it were not sin. 

This being so, the ἱλασμός, when it is applied to the sinner, so to 
speak, neutralises the sin. In this respect the idea of the efficacy of 
Christ’s propitiation corresponds with one aspect of the Pauliné phrase 
‘in Christ.’ The believer being united with Christ enjoys the quickening, 
purifying, action of Christ’s ‘Blood,’ of the virtue of His Life and Death, 
of His Life made available for men through Death. 

Compare Additional Note on i. 9. 


usage. 


Additional Note on ii. 9. St John’s view of the state of man. 


St John assumes that the actual state of man and of the world is known 
by experience, from what we see about us and from history and from 
consciousness. 

Naturally ‘darkuess’ (comp. c. 1. 5, note) is the sphere in which man Man by 
abides (John xii. 46; 1 John ii. 9 ἕως ἄρτι) until it is dispelled. (Comp. 2#ture in 
John viii. 12; 1 Pet. ii. 9; Eph. vi 12; Col. i. 13.) Under one aspect this bees ee 
darkness has wrought its work, and the crisis is past (6. ii. 11, ἐτύφλωσεν, . 
note). Under another aspect there are times when the darkness falls 
afresh over men with a thicker gloom (John xii. 35, ἵνα μὴ ox. ὕ. καταλάβῃ). 

Viewed from a different point of sight this darkness is death (John v. 24). 


1 E.g. Clem. ad Cor. i. 7 of δὲ (the 
Ninevites) μετανοήσαντες ἐπὶ τοῖς ἁμαρ- 
τήμασιν ἐξιλάσαντο τὸν θεὸν ἱκετεύσαντες. 
Herm. Vis. i. 2 πῶς ἐξιλάσομαι τὸν θεὸν 
περὶ τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν μου τῶν τελείων ; Test. 
aii. Patr. Levi 3 οἱ ἄγγελοι.. οἱ λειτουρ- 
γοῦντες καὶ ἐξιλασκόμενοι πρὸς Κύριον ἐπὶ 


πάσαις ταῖς ἀγνοίαις τῶν δικαίων. Philo, 
de plantat. § 39 (i. 354) εὐξάμενοι καὶ 
θυσίας ἀναγαγόντες, καὶ ἱλασάμενοι τὸ 
θεῖον. Comp. Leg. Alleg. iii. § 61 (i. 
121 M.). Joseph. Antt. viii. 4, 3 τίνι 
ἄλλῳ μᾶλλον ἰλάσασθαι μηνίοντα [τὸν 
θεόν]...δεξιώτερόν ἐστιν ἡμῖν ἣ φωνῇ...; 


88 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


This state This present state of man is due to a mysterious interruption of the 
due to ex- Divine plan which is noticed abruptly (John i. 5) and came from another 
ternal in- order (c. iii. 8. It is not due to a physical or metaphysical necessity, and is 
nen foreign to the essence of man. As the creature of God man was made good 
not absolutely but relatively. Sin has disturbed his normal development 
(e. iii. 4). Nothing however is said by St John of the Fall; nor does he 
mention Adam (yet comp. Apoc. xii. 9 ff; xx. 2 ὁ ὄφις ὁ ἀρχαῖος). The sin 
of Cain, the manifestation of sin in the realm of human life, and not the 
sin of Adam, is treated as the archetypal sin (c. iii. 12). 
Man failed ΑΒ a necessary consequence of his state, man failed of himself to gain 
to see God. a, knowledge of God in the way of nature (John i. 10; comp. iii. 3), though 
he was not left unvisited (John i. 4, 9). 
The mis- Under these circumstances God sent his Son to save the world, giving 
sion of the in this the measure of His love (John iii. 16 f.; c.iv. 10). But the coming 
pula) of Christ was in effect a judgment, shewing to men what they had become 
manto (John ix. 39; comp. Apoc. iii. 17 ff.; Luke ii. 34f.). For they were not 
himself. without the power of recognising this Divine revelation (John xv. 22, 24; 
y. 36). The will to recognise God and not the capacity was wanting (John 
γ. 40; vii. 17; villi. 44; xii, 48 ἔχει τὸν κρίνοντα ; comp. iii. 18; vii 67; 
ix. 41). The manifestation of love called out, as a necessary consequence, 
the opposition of selfishness, hatred (John iii. 19 f.; vii. 7; xv. 18 ἢ, 23 ἢ; 
xvii. 14; comp. 6. ii. 9, 11; iii, 10, 15; iv. 20). But this hatred was in 
despite of man’s real nature. It is true still that if he violates moral law 
he ‘lies, and ‘deceives himself’ (c. i. 6, 8; ii. 4, 22; iv. 20). 
Theactual These several traits combine to give a striking view of the grandeur 
state of and powerlessness of man (‘un roseau pensant’). He is made for God: he 
shewn in #8 unable of himself to attain to God: God claims his concurrence with the 
contrasts, activity of Divine love. And it is most worthy of notice that St John 
simply declares the antithetic facts in their simple solemnity. He shews 
no desire to resolve the discords which he accentuates. He leaves them 
for a state of fuller knowledge and larger life. 

Man is in darkness and death (John v. 24; ¢. iii. 14). On the other 
side the true Light shineth (John i. 5; sii. 36; ¢. ii. 8); and Christ offers 
‘His flesh for the life of the world’ (John vi. 51). 

The world ‘lieth in the Evil One’ (c. v. 19). On the other side ‘the 
Prince of the world’ is judged and cast out (John xii. 31; xvi. 11; comp. 
xiii. 40; 6. γ. 4 ἡ νίκη ἡ νικήσασα). There is a human will whichis responsible 
and therefore in that sense ‘free’ (John v. 40; iii. 19 ff.; vii. 17). On the 
other side there is a Divine will which we cannot conceive to be finally 
ineffective (vi. 44 ff., 65; v. 21). 

In the opening of the Gospel, John i. 12 δ, these contrasts find a con- 
current affirmation, On the one side the human element is seen in ἔλαβον, 
πιστεύουσιν, γενέσθαι. On the other side the Divine element is seen in 
oo ἔδωκεν ἐξουσίαν, τέκνα θεοῦ. Comp. John vi. 27 ff (ἐργάζεσθε, 
δώσει). 

The wide The same clear assertion of truths which appear to be in opposition 
sai of extends to other parts of the region of Divine and human relations. There 
contrasts. 18 One absolute message (John xii. 48); and yet concessions are made that 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 89 


men may embrace it more readily (John v. 34; comp. viii. 17). There is a 
group whom Christ speaks of as His own (John x. 27, 4); and yet He 
appeals generally to all, for the image of thirst expresses a universal want 
which Christ alone can satisfy (John vii. 37). Α new birth is necessary for 
the perception of the Divine Kingdom and entrance into it (John iii. 3 f.); 
and yet there are, as still without it, those who ‘are of the truth’ (John 
xviii. 37), who ‘do the truth’ (iii. 21), who are ‘children of God’ (xi. 52). 

In part we can see perhaps where the reconciliation of these statements 
can be found. In part they finally go back to the fundamental antithesis 
of the finite and infinite before which our present powers fail. The teaching 
of St John helps us to see that it is enough that we hold the fulness of the 
truth as it is presented to us in complementary fragments. 


Additional Note on ii. 13. The powers of evil. 


St John speaks comparatively little of subordinate spiritual powers in Few refer- 
his Gospel and Epistles. The ministry of angels is essential to the whole ences to 
structure of the Apocalypse, which contains also characteristic references Ae 
to ‘the Serpent,’ ‘the ancient Serpent,’ ‘the dragon’ (sii. 3 ff; xiii. 2 ff.; powers 
xvi. 13; xx. 2), ‘who is called the Devil and Satan’ (xii. 9); compare also of good 
ix. 20 (τὰ δαιμόνια); xvi. 14 (rv. δαιμονίων). But into these notices we do ie evil in 
not now inquire. Ὁ John. 

The only references to angels in the Gospel are in i. §1 (52); xx. 12 (νυ. (3) 

4, embodies an early tradition, but is no part of the original text). They 
have no place in the Epistles. In the Gospel ‘demons’ are only spoken of 
by the Jews or in direct reference to their words (vii. 20; viii. 48 ff.; x. 20 
f.). In the first epistle ‘spirits’ of anticbrist are described as influencing 
men (6. iv. 2 ff. note, 6). 

But the notices of the representative power of evil are of great im- The Evil 
portance. He is spoken of as ‘the Devil’ (ὁ διάβολος John viii. 44; xiii. 2; One. 
c. iii. 8, 10), the false accuser (John vi. 70 note); ‘Satan’ (ὁ Σατανᾶς John 
xiii, 27), the adversary (comp. 6 κατήγωρ Apoc. xii. 10); ‘the evil one’ 

(ὁ πονηρός XVii. 15, note; 6. ii, 13 ἢ; iii. 12; v. 18 ἢ); ‘the ruler of this (the) 
world’ (ὁ ἄρχων τοῦ κόσμου τούτου John xii. 31; XVi. 11; ὁ τοῦ x. ἄρχ. John 
xiv. 30). 

Of his origin nothing is specially said. But enough is laid down to A fallen 
exclude the notion of two coordinate or absolute or original beings, good being. 
and evil. He was originally good, but ‘he stood not (John viii. 44 οὐκ 
ἔστηκεν, note) in the truth.’ This is all that we are concerned to know. 

For the rest he appears ‘from the beginning’ on the scene of human 
activity (c. iii. 8). Thus he stands in opposition to the Word (c. i. 1), and 
finally to the Incarnate Son (c. iii. 8 note; v. 18 ἢ; John xiv. 30 ἢ). 

In this respect he is directly at variance with Christ in His essential The anta- 
character. Christ is ‘the truth’ (John xiv. 6): the devil is a liar (John viii. gonist of 
44; comp. 6. ii. 22). Christ is ‘the life’ (John xiv. 6): the devil is ἃ the Son. 
murderer (John viii. 44; comp. c. iii, 15). In each case a personal an- 


gO 


His pre- 
sent influ- 
ence on 
men. 


Already 
over- 
thrown. 


St John’s 
concep- 
tion of 
creation. 


An order 
unfolded 
in spite of 
the irrup- 
tion of 
darkness. 
A Divine 
‘must.’ 


A Divine 
‘cannot.’ 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


tagonist is set over against the absolute idea. In relation to the reality 
of things, and in relation to human fellowship: in the regions of thought, 
feeling, action; the devil conflicts with the Son of God. 

For the present, as the title ‘the ruler of this world’ implies, the devil 
exercises a wide influence over men (c. iii. 8 f£ ; John viii. 44; xiii. 2, 27). 
They may become his ‘sons,’ his ‘children’ (6. iii. 10 note); they may be ‘of 
him’ (c. iii. 8). But they are never said to be ‘born of him,’ as they are 
born of God (c. ii. 29 &c.). And in relation to the work of Christ he is 
already finally defeated (John xvi. 11; xii. 31; xiv. 30; 6. v. 4, 18). It 
remains to secure the fruits of the victory. 


Additional Note on 11. 17. St John’s teaching on creation. 


The main conception of creation which is present in the writings of St 
John is expressed by the first notice which he makes of it: ‘all things came 
into being (éyévero) through [the Word]’ (John i. 3). This statement sets 
aside the notions of eternal matter and of inherent evil in matter. ‘There 
was when’ the world ‘was not’ (John xvii. 5, 24); and, by implication, all 
things as made were good. The agency of the Word ‘who was God’ again 
excludes both the Gnostic idea of a Demiurge, a creator essentially inferior 
to God; and the idea of an abstract Monotheism, in which there is no living 
relation between the creature and the Creator ; for as all things come into 
being ‘through’ the Word, so they are supported ‘in’ Him (John i. 3 6 yéy. 
ἐν αὐτῷ ζωὴ ἦν note; comp. Col i. 16 f.; Heb. i. 3). And yet more the 
use of the term ἐγένετο, ‘came into being,’ as distinguished from ἐκτίσθη 
‘were created, suggests the thought that Creation is to be regarded 
(according to our apprehension) as a manifestation of a Divine law of love. 
Thus Creation (πάντα ἐγένετο δι’ αὐτοῦ) answers to the Incarnation (ὁ λόγος 
σὰρξ ἐγένετο). All the unfolding and infolding of finite being to the last 
issue lies in the fulfilment of His will Who is love. 

The irruption of darkness, however, has hindered the normal progress of 
the counsel of God. This is obvious in ‘the world’ which falls within the 
range of man’s observation. But in spite of the violation of the Divine 
order by man there is still a fulfilment of the counsel of God in the world. 
This is seen most distinctly in the record of the Lord’s work. In the 
accomplishment of this there is a Divine necessity, a ‘must’ and a ‘ cannot’ 
in the very nature of things; and also a Divine sequence in the unfolding 
of its parts. 

This Divine ‘must’ (δεῖ) extends to the relation of the Forerunner to 
Christ (iii. 30); to the fulfilment of the work of God during an allotted 
time (ix. 4); to the Passion and Exaltation (iii. 14; xii. 34); to the Rising 
again (xx. 9); to the execution of a wider office (x. 16) (comp. Apoc. i. 1; 
iv. 1; xxii. 6; xvii. 10; xx. 3). 

On the other hand there is also a ‘cannot, a moral, and not an 
external or arbitrary, impossibility in life. This defines, while it does 
not limit, the action of the Son: v. 19, 30 (comp. Mark vi.5). And so also it 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. ΟΙ 


fixes the conditions of discipleship (iii. 5; vi. 44, 65; vii. 34, 36; viii. 21 ἃ; 
comp. xiii. 33, 36); of understanding (iii. 3; viii. 43 f.; xiv. 17); of faith 
(xii 39; comp. v. 44); of fruitfulness (xv. 4 f.); of progress (xvi. 12); of 
character (1 John iii. 9). 

These terms (‘ must,’ ‘cannot’) lay open the conditions (so to speak) of A Divine 
the Lord’s life. The Divine sequence in the course of its events is no less ‘20ur.’ 
distinctly marked by the term ‘hour’ The crises of the manifestations of 
the Lord are absolutely fixed in time (11. 4; comp. xi. 9 f.; ix. 4). Till this 
hour comes His enemies are powerless (vii. 30; viii. 20). When it has 
come He recognises its advent (xii. 27; xvii. 1); and it is appointed with 
a view to the issue to which it leads (sii. 23; xiii. 1 ἵνα). 

Compare iv. 21, 23; v. 25, 28; 1 John ii. 18; Apoc. xiv. 7, 15 (dpa); 

John vii. 6, 8 (καιρός); Eph. i. 10 τὸ πλήρωμα τῶν καιρῶν; Gal. iv. 4 τὸ 
πλήρωμα τοῦ χρόνου. 

Under this same aspect the ‘ works’ of the Lord are said to bave been The life of 
‘given’ to Him (v. 36; xvii. 4). The circumstances which furnished Christ, 
occasion for them are shewn to enter into the scheme of providence (ix. 3 
ἵνα; xi. 4 ἵνα. Even unbelief was a necessity in regard of the history of 
mankind (xii. 38; xiii. 18; xv. 25; xvii. 12). This being so, Christ knew 
all ‘the things that were coming upon Him’ (xviii. 4; comp. xiii. 1, 113 vi 
64; comp. xviii. 9, 32). He laid down His life ‘in order to take it again’ 

(x. 17). This was His Father’s will. 

The whole life of Christ was thus a ‘fulfilment, ‘a bringing to a perfect 
accomplishment’ of all that had been shadowed forth or begun}. 

The same Divine appointment is extended to the discipline of the Church. and the 
The extremity of persecution is part of the revelation of the counsel of God life of the 
(John xvi. 2 ἵνα, note), as even was the failure of the disciples at their τ πὰ 
Master’s suffering (John xvi. 32 ἵνα, note). The birth of the Church has a to law. 
real correspondence with the birth of the man (John xvi. 21 ff). And in 
the work of service there is an appointed difference of function with a 
common end (John iv. 36 ff). 

The life of Christ and the life of the Church, as presented by St John, thus A true 
become revelations of a perfect order even in the disorder of the world sara 
lying beneath the surface of things, and veiled by suffering and by the josth ap- 
workings of evil. In the same way he seems to indicate that below the pearances, 
transitory appearances of nature there is that which is Divine and abiding. 

‘The world passeth away (mapdyerat) and the desire thereof’ (1 John ii. 
17, 8), but at the same time he looked for a new heaven and a new earth 
(Apoc. xxi. 1). 

He recognised most sharply the difference between the natural and the 

unnatural in what we call Nature as a whole, and saw in the complete 


1 The use of the two words πληρόω, (Ὁ) τελειῶσαι 

τελειόω is worth study: iv, 34 τελ. αὐτοῦ τὸ ἔργον; V. 36 τὰ 
(α) πληρῶσαι ἔργα ἃ δέδ. ἵνα τελ.; xvii. 4 τὸ ἔργον 
vii. 8 ὁ ἐμὸς καιρὸς οὕπω πεπλήρωται. τελ. ὃ δέδωκάς μοι. 
Of Holy Scripture and Divine words: Of Holy Scripture: xix. 28 ἵνα red. ἡ 


ἵνα πληρωθῇ xii. 38; xiii. 18; xv. 25; ‘yp. Comp. τετέλεσται, xix. 28, 30; and 
Xvii. 12; xviii. 32; xix. 24,36. Comp. Apoc. x. 7. 
Apoe. vi. 11. 


Ο2 


Elements 
in the con- 
ception of 
Anti- 
christ. 


IRENzUS. 


ORIGEN. 


TERTUL- 
LIAN, 


Balaam. 


Armillus, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


destruction of the unnatural, the restoration of Nature. In this position 
he stands alike removed from the Hellenic worship of nature and from the 
Gnostic degradation of nature. (Comp. Lutterbeck, Lehrb. ad. Apost. ii. 
270 f.) 


Additional Note on ii. 18. Antichrost. 


Different elements entered into the conception of ‘Antichrist’ in early 
patristic literature. Of these the chief were Dan. vii. 7 ff.; Matt. xxiv. 
23 ff.; 2 Thess. ii. 3 ff; Apoe. xiii. 

But the aspects under which the opposing power is presented by St 
Paul and St John (Epistle) are distinct. The portraiture in St Paul is based 
on that of Daniel and presents a single adversary claiming personal wor- 
ship, while St John dwells upon the spiritual element in his claims, and the 
spiritual falsehood which gave him the semblance of strength. 

Inewn.£0s, the earliest writer who treats of the subject in detail, combines 
the name of Antichrist with the description in 2 Thess. ii. 3 ff. and the 
cognate passages in Daniel, St Matthew and the Apocalypse (Iren. v. 25 ff.; 
compare iii. 6, 4; 7, 2; 16, 5,8; 23, 7). 

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA is silent on Antichrist. But the teaching on 
Antichrist attracted the attention of Cexsus, though Origen says that he had 
not read what was said of him by Daniel or Paul (c. Cels. vi. 45). In reply 
to Celsus OriceN explains his own view, which is briefly that the Son of 
God and the son of the evil one, of Satan, of the devil, stand at the opposite 
poles of humanity, presenting in direct opposition the capacity of man for 
good and for evil. Elsewhere Origen draws out at length a comparison of 
Christ and Antichrist. All that Christ is in reality Antichrist offers in 
false appearance (Comm. Ser. in Matt. § 27); and so all false teaching 
which assumes the guise of truth, among heretics and even among heathen, 
is in some sense ‘ Antichrist’ (zd. 8. 47). 

TERTULLIAN speaks several times of Antichrist and Antichrists. 
Quoting 2 Thess. ii. 3 he writes ‘homo delinguentia, id est, antichristus’ 
(de Res. carnis, 24; cf. 27). Again referring to Matt. xxiv. 24, he asks: 
‘qui pseudoprophete sunt nisi falsi preedicatores? qui pseudapostoli nisi 
adulteri evangelizatores? qui antichristi nisi Christi rebelles? (de prarscr. 
her. 4). And again in reference to 1 John ii. 18 he writes: in epistola 
sua eos maxime antichristos vocat qui Christum negarent in carne venisse, 
et qui non putarent Jesum esse filium dei. Illud Marcion, hoc Ebion 
vindicavit (td. 33). 

One feature in the conception of Antichrist ought not to be overlooked. 
Just as Moses was the type of the Christ in His prophetic character, 
Balaam, ‘the anti-Moses,’ was regarded as a type of the Antichrist. This 
explains the enigmatic references in Apoc. ii. 14 (6); Jude 11; 2 Pet. 
11, 15. 

In late Rabbinic traditions an Antichrist (Armillus, Armalgus) was 
represented as killing the Messiah of the stock of Ephraim, and then 
himself slain by the Messiah of the stock of David (Targ. on Is. xi. 4; 
comp. 2 Thess. ii. 8). 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 93 


The Epistles to the Seven Churches form a commentary on the idea of The Apo- 
the many antichrists. calypse. 
Apoc. ii. 2 (Ephesus) τοὺς λέγοντας ἑαυτοὺς ἀποστόλους. id. 6 τὰ ἔργα 
τῶν Νικολαιτῶν. 
ii, 9 (Smyrna) τῶν λεγόντων Ἰουδαίους εἶναι. 
ii. 13 (Pergamum) ὅπου ὁ θρόνος τοῦ Σατανᾶ. 14 τὴν διδαχὴν Βαλαάμ. 
15 τὴν διδαχὴν Νικολαιτῶν. , 
ii. 20 (Thyatira) ᾿Ιεζέβελ, ἡ λέγουσα ἑαυτὴν προφῆτιν. 24 τὰ βαθέα τοῦ 
Sarava (cf. τ Cor. ii. 10). 
iil, 3 (Sardis) μνημόνευε πῶς εἴληφας καὶ ἤκουσας καὶ τήρει. 
iii, 8 f (Philadelphia) τῆς συναγωγῆς τοῦ Σατανᾶ, τῶν λεγόντων ἑαυτοὺς 
Ἰουδαίους εἶναι. 


Additional Note on the reading of ii. 20. 


There is a remarkable variety of readings in the last words of this 
verse : 

(1) καὶ οἴδατε πάντα 

AC MSS mss 
Memph Vulg. 

The Syriac reads πάντα but translates it as if it were masc. (and know 
every man). 

(2) καὶ οἴδατε (-αι N) πάντες NP 9. 

Hesych. Presb. (8666. vii) in Lev. i. 5 ff. (Migne P. Gr. xcitr. p. 796) Et 
vos unctionem habetis a sancto et scitis omnes. 

(3) οἴδατε πάντες Β Theb. 

The rendering which is given without variation in the Discourses of 
Augustine (ad loc.) ut ipsi vobis manifesti sitis can hardly be correct. 
His comment suggests πάντες : hanc unctionem Christi dicit omnes qui 
habent cognoscere malos et bonos; nec opus esse ut doceantur quia ipsa 
unctio docet eos. 

The Latin translation of Irenzeus, in a continuous quotation of vv. 18—22, 
omits Ὁ. 20 and part of δ. 21: ...sed ut manifestarentur quoniam non sunt 
ex nobis. Cognoscite ergo quoniam omne mendacium extraneum est et 
non est de veritate. Quis est mendax...(Iren. iii. 16. 5). 

The combination for πάντες NBP 9 Theb. is very strong; and the shorter 
reading without «ai readily explains how the others arose. When once the 
connexion of οἴδατε with τὴν ἀλήθειαν was lost, the insertion of καί and the 
change of πάντες to πάντα was almost inevitable, especially with the ap- 
parent parallel in Ὁ. 27 περὶ πάντων. 

The occurrence of 9 (Cambr. Univ. Libr. Kk. vi. 4) in the small group of 
authorities which have preserved the main element of the true reading 
may serve as an excuse for directing atteution to that remarkable ΜΒ, 
which has been strangely overlooked. 

It was pointed out by Porson and Marsh that this Ms is that marked 
cy in Stephens’ edition of 1550; and apparently the capricious selection of 


94 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


readings quoted from it by Stephens has been the limit of the knowledge 
of the Ms preserved by later editors. Mill’s generalisations from the 
readings in Stephens (Proleg. 1170) might well have caused it to be more 
carefully examined. 

The following readings in 1 John are worthy of notice : 


i 2 
ad 
ea. 
li, 1 
— 8 
—II 
— 18 


v. 4 
— 20 
The title 


εις ἀρ ΡΥ 
αγίου απ. Id 


ἐφανερώθη ἐν ἡμῖν. 
ἡμῶν. 
τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶν. 
γράφομεν. 
ἐν ἡμῖν. 
ἐτύφλωσεν αὐτὸν καὶ τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς αὐτοῦ. 
ἡ ἐπιθυμία Om, αὐτοῦ. 
νῦν om. καί, 

Sc ash , 
καὶ οἴδατε πάντες. 
μὰ 
ἔδωκεν. 


κληθῶμεν καὶ ἐσμέν. 

τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶν. 

τέκνα. 

τοῦ διαβόλου ἐστίν om. ἐκ. 

ὁ διάβολος ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς. 

γινωσκόμεθα. 

καταγινώσκῃ OM. ἡμῶν. 

πιστεύωμεν. 

γινώσκομεν. 

Ἰησοῦν om. τόν. 

ὁ μὴ ἀγαπῶν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ ἔστιν. 
ἠγαπήκαμεν. 

ὑμῶν. 

ἡ ζωὴ ἡ αἰώνιος. 

of the Epistle is ἐπιστολὴ ᾿Ιωάννου ἃ and the subscription τοῦ 
ἐπιστολὴ a, 


IIT. 1] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 95 


II. "Were ποταπὴν ἀγάπην δέδωκεν ἡμῖν ὁ πατὴρ 


t δέδωκεν NBC: ἔδωκεν A. 


11. ΤῊΣ cuinpren or Gop anp 

THE CHILDREN OF THE DEVIL (ili. 1—12). 

_The section seems to fall most na- 
turally into three parts : 


1. The position present and future 
of the children of God (iii. 1—3). 

2. The essential character of the 
children of God (4—9). 


3. The outward manifestation of 
the children of God (10—12). 

The thoughts are unfolded through- 
out in contrast with the corresponding 
thoughts as tv the position, character, 
and manifestation of ‘the children of 
the devil’ The world knows not 
Christians. Sin is incompatible with 
Sonship of God. Active hatred is the 
sign of hostility to right. 

τ. The position present and future 
of the children of God (1—3). 

The position of Christians is con- 
sidered in regard both to the present 
(Ὁ. 1) and to the future (v. 2). They 
stand now to ‘the Father’ in the rela- 
tion of ‘children of God’ in title and 
in reality: on the other hand ‘the 
world’ fails to recognise them. Their 
future is as yet unrevealed; but so 
much is known that it will answer to 
the open, transfiguring vision of God 
in Christ. Meanwhile therefore the 
thought of this transfiguration is the 
rule and inspiration of Christian effort 
(υ. 3). 

« Behold (See) what manner of 
love the Father hath given to us, 
that we should be called children of 
God:—and such we are. For this 
cause the world knoweth us not, 
because it knew him not. ? Beloved, 
now are we children of God, and it 
is not yet manifested what we shall 
be. We know that if he shall be 
manifested, we shall be like him, 
because we shall see him even as he is. 
And every one that hath this hope 


ἡμῖν : ὑμῖν Β. 


on him purifieth himself even as he 
is pure. 

1. Ἴδετε] Videte V., Ecce Aug., Be- 
hold, See. The use of the plural is re- 
markable,and elsewhere it is used only 
of something actually visible (Gal. vi. 
11; yet comp. Acts xiii. 41, Lxx). The 
image at the close of the last chapter 
(born of Him) seems to fill St John’s 
vision, and, as he pauses to dwell upon 
it himself, he invites his readers to 
contemplate the same truth as pre- 
sent before them in an intelligible 
shape. 

ποταπὴν ἀγάπην] gualem carita- 
tem (dilectionem Aug.) V., what man- 
ner of love truly divine in its nature. 
The word ποταπός, which is not found 
in the Lxx, is rare in the New Testa- 
ment. It is used to call attention to 
the character both of persons (Matt. 
viii. 27; Luke vii. 39; 2 Pet. iii. 11) 
and of things (Mk. xiii. 1; Luke i. 
29). 

ὁ πατήρ] the Father. This title is 
chosen in order to illustrate and (in 
some degree) to explain the gift of 
love which God has bestowed on men. 

δέδωκεν 7.) dedit nobis V., hath 
given to us. Comp. John xiv. 27. The 
love is not simply exhibited towards 
believers, but imparted to them. The 
divine love is. as it were, infused into 
them, so that it is their own, and be- 
comes in them the source of a divine 
life (Rom. xiii. 10). In virtue of this 
gift therefore they are inspired with a 
love which is like the love of God, and 
by this they truly claim the title of 
children of God, as partakers in His 
nature. Comp.c.iv. 7,19. See also 
Leo, Serm. xii. § 1 (Migne, Patrol. 
Lat. uv. p. 169): Diligendo itaque 
nos Deus ad imaginem suam nos re- 
Ραγαῦ et, ut in nobis formam suz bo- 
nitatis inveniat, dat unde ipsi quoque 
quod operatur operemur, accendens 


οὔ THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


.«“ ΄ τῶν ios) \ ? ’ 
ἵνα τέκνα θεοῦ κληθώμεν, καὶ ἐσμέν. 


[III 1 


Α ΝΕ 
διὰ τοῦτο ὁ 


καὶ ἐσμέν NABC vg me the syrr: om. ς΄, The Latt. by a natural error read et 


simus (as depending on wt). 


scilicet mentium nostrarum lucernas, 
et igne nos suse caritatis inflammans, 
ut non solum ipsum sed etiam quid- 
quid diligit diligamus, 

With δέδωκεν, which regards the en- 
dowment of the receiver, contrast 
κεχάρισται (Gal. iii. 18), ἐχαρίσατο 
(Phil. ii. 9) which regards the feeling 
of the giver. 

ἡμῖν (vpir)] St John is here con- 
sidering the blessing of love as actu- 
ally realised in the Christian society. 
Contrast John iii. 16 ἠγάπησεν ὁ θεὸς 
τὸν κόσμον. 

ἵνα... κληθῶμεν ...1 ut...nominemur 
(vocemur Aug.) V., that we should 
be called. The final particle has its 
full force. The divine gift of love 
which is appropriated by the believer 
forms the basis, the justification, of 
the divine title. The end of the bless- 
ing is that sonship may be real. For 
ἵνα compare Ὁ. 11 note. 

Pelagii...condemnatur heeresis in eo 
quod dicitur a Deo nobis caritatem... 
dari qua adoptionem filiorum accipia- 
mus (Bede). 

τέκνα θεοῦ] filti Det V., children of 
God not sons of God which comes 
from the Latin. The thought here 
is of the community of nature with 
the prospect of development (τέκνον, 
comp. 2 Pet. i. 4), and not of the posi- 
tion of privilege (vids). The only place 
in St John’s writings where ‘son’ is 
used of the relation of man to God is 
Apoc. xxi. 7 in a free quotation from 
Zech. viii. 8. 

The use of vids is characteristic of 
St Paul’s Epistles to the Romans and 
Galatians: Rom. viii. 14, 19; Gal. iii. 
26; iv. 6, 7. Comp. Heb. ii. το, xii. 
ς ff.; Rom. ix. 26; 2 Cor. vi. 18; Matt. 
v. 9, 45, xvii. 26; Luke xi. 35, xx. 36. 

On the other hand the idea of ‘chil- 
dren of God’ (τέκνα θεοῦ) is uot un- 


Compare ¢. v. 20. 


frequent in St John: vz. 2, το, v. 2; 
John i. 12, xi. 52. See Additional 
Note. 

By using θεοῦ in place of the sim- 
ple pronoun αὐτοῦ St John, reciting 
the full name of Christians (Ὁ. 10; v. 
2; John i. 12, xi. 52; Rom. viii. 16 ff, 
ix. 8; Phil. ii. 15), emphasises the idea 
of the nobility of the Christian’s posi- 
tion (‘children of Him who is God’). 

κληθῶμεν] be called. The privilege 
is already enjoyed in the present and 
not only anticipated in the future. 
Christians are outwardly recognised 
as ‘God’s children’ in their services 
and intercourse with others. Such 
an open recognition of the title gives 
a solemn dignity to it. 

It is worthy of notice that St John 
never uses καλεῖν of the Divine ‘call’ 
(John x. 3 φωνεῖ. Comp. John ii. 2. 

καὶ ἐσμέν] and such we are. This 
parenthetical addition is an emphatic 
expression of the Apostle’s own faith. 
He has stated the historic position of 
Christians in the world, which depends 
on the Father’s gift of love. He af- 
firms now that that historic position 
corresponds with a real fact. The 
name represents an absolute truth. 
For such an introduction of a reflec- 
tive comment see i. 2 note; 2 John 2. 
The Latin by a natural error con- 
nects the ἐσμέν with ἵνα, ut nomine- 
mur...et simus. 

διὰ τοῦτο] propter hoc V., For this 
cause (iv. 5), 1.6. because we are chil- 
dren of God, and so share His nature, 
the world knoweth us not, seeing that 
it has shewn decisively its inability 
to recognise Him. The reference 
to the world at first sight seems to 
interrupt the current of thought, but 
St John’s whole argument proceeds 
on the supposition that men stand 
between two powers, God and the 


ΤΠ. 2] 


, , - / ᾿ 
κόσμος οὐ γινώσκει ἡμάς ὅτι οὐκ ἔγνω αὐτόν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 97 


Ξ᾽λγα- 


᾽ὔ ἮΝ f - 2 f \ of 2 μ᾽. ,ὔ 
πητοί, νῦν τέκνα θεοῦ ἐσμέν, καὶ οὔπω ἐφανερώθη τὶ 


ἡμᾶς: ὑμᾶς N*. 


world. He has shewn the relation 
in which they stand to God: he now 
shews the relation in which they stand 
to the world. At the same time the 
clause meets an objection which is 
likely to rise from a consideration of 
the character of Christians. If they 
are children of God, righteous and 
loving, may they not look for an im- 
mediate and decisive victory? So we 
are inclined to argue; and therefore 
the Apostle at once points out that 
their likeness to God becomes the oc- 
casion of misunderstanding. 

οὐ γινώσκει... οὐκ ἔγνω... non no- 
vit...non novit... V.. non cognoscit... 
non cognovit...Aug., the world know- 
eth us not, does not enter into, come 
to understand, our principles and 
methods and character, for true know- 
ledge of men requires sympathy (6. ii. 
3 note). The conduct of Christians 
must be more or less a riddle to those 
who do not take account of that 
which is to them the spring of action. 
This follows from the fact that when 
the opportunity was given to the 
world for recognising the great fea- 
tures of the divine character it knew 
Him not (comp. ὁ. iv. 8 note). The 
world failed to recognise God so far 
as He was manifested in creation and 
history (1 Cor. i. 21); and its failure 
was still more conspicuous when He 
was manifested in His Son (John xvi. 
3). It is to this revelation specially 
that the Apostle refers. The ‘Him’ 
is God in Christ, as in ii. 29. 

Augustine says, using an impressive 
image: [homines] amando delecta- 
tiones peccatorum non agnoscebant 
Deum: amando quod febris suadebat 
injuriam medico faciebant. 

2. ᾿Αγαπητοί Carissimi V., Di- 
lectissimt Aug., Beloved. The title 
(ii. 7 note) embodies the thought 


W. J. 


which has been just expressed. St 
John in the spirit of love addresses 
those who with him look forward to 
the issue of love. In doing this he 
takes up the words which he has just 
used, half in personal reflection (καὶ 
ἐσμέν); ‘Yes, now are we children, 
children with the promise of mature 
development.’ The change to which 
he thus looks forward will not be in 
the position of children, but in the 
conditions under which the relation 
will be shewn. The Christian has now, 
even in the present life, that which 
carries with it potentially infinite 
blessings, but the manifestation of his 
sonship is hindered by the circum- 
stances in which he is placed. He 
will not be anything essentially differ- 
ent hereafter, but he will be what he 
is now essentially more completely, 
though in ways wholly beyond our 
powers of imagination. 

νῦν..«ἐσμέν, kat...] now are 166... 
and... The thought of what Christians 
are and the thought of what they will 
be are treated as parts of the same 
thought and not placed in contrast. 
The fact and the hope are both power- 
ful for life. 

οὔπω ἐφανερώθη...ἐὰν φανερωθῇ... 
nondum apparuit...cum apparue- 
rit...V., nondum manifestatum est 
(and apparuit)...cum apparuerit 
(and manifestatum fuerit) Aug. 
manifestatum est...si mantfestaverit 
(one Ms, manifestatus fuerit) Tert., 
nondum revelatum est...cum revela- 
tum fuerit Ambr. 

The main difficulty in this passage 
lies in the interpretation of the clause 
ἐὰν φανερωθῇ. The subject is not 
expressed; and the clause can be 
rendered either (1) if ἐξ shall be 
manifested i.e. what we shall be; 
or (2) if Ae shall be manifested. In 


7 


98 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


> ‘ 

ἐσόμεθα. 
4 

μεθα, ὅτι 


ΠῚ]. 3 


af .«“ 2 =~ φῳ 2 a~ 3 / 
οἴδαμεν ὅτι ἐὰν φανερωθῆ ὅμοιοι αὐτῷ ἐσό- 
? / ? A , > 

ὀψόμεθα αὐτὸν καθώς ἐστιν. 


3xat ἧς ὁ 
καὶ πὰς O 


2 οἴδαμεν SABC vg the syr hl: -Ὁ δέ S me syr vg. 


favour of the first interpretation it is 
urged that the clause must refer back 
to the corresponding words (οὔπω 
ἐφανερώθη) which have immediately 
gone before: it is wot yet manifested... 
if it shall be manifested...; unless 
such an explanation be obviously 
excluded by other considerations ; 
and on the other hand it is answered 
rightly, I think, that this is in fact 
the case ; that the words if ἐξ shall 
be manifested are altogether without 
force; or rather that they obscure the 
meaning. The knowledge which is 
affirmed is not dependent on any 
manifestation, but absolute. Christians 
already possess it ; and their certainty 
so far is not conditioned by anything 
future. Or to put the thought some- 
what differently: it cannot be said 
that the knowledge that we shall be 
like Christ (which is assumed) de- 
pends upon the manifestation of what 
we shall be. On the other hand there 
is an inspiring power in the assurance 
that our likeness to the Lord will be 
a likeness to His glorified Being, 
which will hereafter be shewn, though 
as yet we cannot understand what it 
is. 
And further in support of the ren- 
dering ¢f he shall be manifested it is to 
be noticed that the same phrase has 
been used in ii. 28 where the meaning 
is beyond all doubt. It may be added 
that this use of φανεροῦσθαι appears 
to rule the whole line of the Apostle’s 
thought (ii. 28, iii. 8). Christ has been 
(was) manifested and He will be 
manifested. The past manifestations 
made some things clear and left some 
things dark (iii. 5, 8). The future 
manifestation will remove this dark- 
ness (comp. Col. iii. 4). 

Even in the foregoing clause there 
is, as will be seen, something of this 


same thought. The manifestations of 
the Risen Christ have not completely 
illuminated our future. 

οὔπω ἐφανερώθη] it is not yet made 
manifest. The aorist (ἐφανερώθη) ap- 
pears to point back to some definite 
occasion on which the revelation 
might have been expected (compare 
ἔγνω Ὁ. 1). Perhaps it is best to 
refer the word to the manifestations 
(comp. ii. 28 note) of the Risen Lord. 
These revelations of a changed and 
glorified humanity do not make 
known to us what we shall be. They 
only serve to shew that the limita- 
tions of the present mode of existence 
will be removed. 

ti ἐσόμεθα] For. the use of the 
direct interrogation, see Moulton’s 
Winer, pp. 210 f. 

οἴδαμεν] We know. Comp.c. v. 2, 18 
notes. There is no opposition between 
this clause and that which imme- 
diately precedes such as is suggested 
by the δέ of the common text. The 
knowledge corresponds with the 
whole consciousness of the position 
of children. 

ὅμοιοι αὐτῷ] similes ei V., like him, 
like God inChrist. The image in which 
we were made will then be consum- 
mated in the likeness to which it was 
the divine purpose that we should 
attain. Compare the Essay on The 
Gospel of Creation, m1. τ (a). 

This likeness of man redeemed and 
perfected to God is the likeness of 
the creature reflecting the glory of 
the Creator. Contrast Phil. ii. 6 τὸ 
εἶναι ἴσα θεῷ, said of the Son. Dispar 
est res, sed sicut ad similitudinem 
dicitur. Habemus ergo et nos imagi- 
nem Dei, sed non illam quam habet 
Filius aequalis Patri (Aug.). 

ὅτι ὀψόμεθα... quoniam videbi- 
mus...V., because we shall see.... The 


UL 3] 


causal particle is ambiguous.... The 
likeness to God may be either (1) the 
necessary condition, or (2) the actual 
consequence of the Divine Vision. 
The argument may be: We shall see 
God, and therefore, since this is pos- 
sible, we must be like Him; or, We 
shall see God, and in that Presence 
we shall reflect His glory and be 
transformed into His likeness. Both 
thoughts are scriptural; and _per- 
haps the two thoughts are not very 
sharply distinguished here. It is 
true that likeness is, in this case, the 
condition of vision; and it is true 
also that likeness is the consequence 
of vision. We see that which we 
have the sympathetic power of see- 
ing and we gain greater power of 
seeing, that is greater sympathy with 
the object of sight, by exercise of 
the power which we have. Augus- 
tine dwells upon this idea: Tota vita 
Christiani boni sanctum desiderium 
est. Quod autem desideras nondum 
vides; sed desiderando capax efficeris 
ut cum venerit quod videas implearis. 
cee Deus differendo extendit desi- 
derium, desiderando extendit ani- 
mum, extendendo facit capaciorem. 
And again: Heec est vita nostra ut 
desiderando exerceamur. 

At the same time it may be urged 
that the verb (écdue6a), which de- 
scribes a being and not a becoming 
(γενησόμεθα τ Cor. xv. 37, 54; John 
x. 16), appears to mark a state which 
co-exists with the divine manifesta- 
tion at the first, and does not follow 
from it. On the other hand the 
thought of the transfiguring virtue of 
the divine vision is familiar. Comp. 
2 Cor. iii. 18; v. 4; Iren. Iv. 38. 3 
(a very fine passage). 

In either case the central truth is 
the same. The great confidence of 
the believer is that he will see the 
full revelation of the glory of God in 
Christ, and therefore that when that 
is made he will be like Him. Time, 
indeed, before and after, has no place 
in the eternal. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 99 


Augustine strives to emphasise the 
thought of the verse: Ergo visuri su- 
mus quandam visionem...przecellen- 
tem omnes pulcritudines terrenas, 
aurl, argenti, nemorum atque cam- 
porum, pulcritudinem maris et aeris, 
pulcritudinem solis et lune, pulecri- 
tudinem stellarum, pulcritudinem an- 
gelorum: omnia superantem quia ex 
ipsa pulcra sunt omnia. Quid ergo 
nos erimus quando heee videbimus? 
Quid nobis promissum est? Similes 
et erimus, quoniam videbimus eum 
sicuti est. Quomodo potuit lingua 
sonuit : cetera corde cogitentur. 

Philo in a remarkable passage 
(de Abr. § 12, ii. pp. 9 f. M.) speaks of 
the vision of the ‘Father of all things,’ 
as man’s highest blessing: ὅτῳ ἐξεγέ- 
veTO μὴ μόνον τὰ ἄλλα ὅσα ἐν TH φύσει 
60 ἐπιστήμης καταλαμβάνειν ἀλλὰ καὶ 
τὸν πατέρα καὶ ποιητὴν τῶν συμπάντων 
ὁρᾶν, ἐπ᾿ ἄκρον εὐδαιμονίας ἴστω προ- 
ἐληλυθώς. οὐδὲν γὰρ ἀνωτέρω θεοῦ πρὸς 
ὃν εἴ τις τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς τείνας ὄμμα 
ἔφθακε μονὴν εὐχέσθω καὶ στάσιν. 

The main elements in the idea of 
the ‘vision’ of God seem to be a 
real knowledge, a direct knowledge, 
a continuous knowledge, a knowledge 
which is the foundation of service. 
The seat of the organ of spiritual sight 
is the ‘heart, the part of man which 
is representative of personal character 
(Eph. i. 18; Matt. v. 8). The ‘vision’ 
of God’s face appears in the hope of 
the righteous in the Psalms (Ps. xvii. 
15; xi. 7 Hupfeld), while it is recog- 
nised as unattainable and unbearable 
by man in the present earthly life 
(Ex. xxxiii. 18 ff.). In the new Jeru- 
salem it finds accomplishment, Apoc. 
xxii. 4, His servants (δοῦλοι) shall do 
Him service (λατρεύσουσιν) and they 
shall see His face and His name 
shall be on their foreheads. As He 
is light, they shall be made light 
(comp. Eph. v. 13), and when the sons 
of God are thus revealed the end of 
creation will be reached (Rom. viii. 
18 ff.). 

In treating of this final transfigu- 

7—2 


100 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[III. 3 


\ , ΄ >> 2 -~ ΄ © \ \ 
ἔχων τὴν ἐλπίδα ταύτην ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ ἁγνίζει ἑαυτὸν καθὼς 


ration the Greek Fathers did not 
scruple to speak of men as being 
‘deified’ (θεοποιεῖσθαι), though the 
phrase sounds strange to our ears 
(Athan. de Ine. Verbi iv. § 22). 

καθώς ἐστιν] sicuti est V., ecen as He 
is. Hitherto the Divine in Christ has 
been veiled. Hereafter the Godhead 
will be plain as the Manhood, when, 
according to Christ’s prayer, His dis- 
ciples shall see His Glory (John xvii. 
24). It may be doubted whether it 
could be said of the Father that men 
shall see Him ‘as He is. Comp. 
1 Cor. xiii. 12, ἄρτι δι ἐσόπτρου ἐν ai- 
viypart τότε πρόσωπον πρὸς πρόσωπον. 
Thomas Aquinas discusses at length 
(Sum. Theol. Suppl. Qu. xcii, art. 1) 
the question whether the human intel- 
lect can attain to seeing God in essence 
(ad videndum Deum per essentiam), 
and concludes in the affirmative. 

‘The last words with which [Dr 
Arnold] closed his last lecture on the 
New Testament were in commenting 
on [this verse}, “So too,” he said, 
“in the Corinthians, For now we see 
through a glass darkly, but then face 
to face. Yes,” he added, with marked 
fervency, “the mere contemplation of 
Christ shall transform us into His 
likeness”’ (Life ii. 329 f.). 

3. καὶ πᾶς... ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ] et omnis qui 
habet hanc spem in eo (ipso Aug.) V., 
And every one that hath this hope on 
Him. The practical conclusion from 
the great Christian hope of the assi- 
milation of the believer to his Lord 
is given as a coordinate thought (kai). 
The conclusion itself is involved in 
the hope. He who looks forward to 
becoming like God hereafter must 
strive after His likeness now: Matt. 
v. 8; Gal. v. 5, ἐλπίδα δικαιοσύνης 
ἀπεκδεχόμεθα. 

By employing the universal form of 
expression (πᾶς ὁ ἔχων) instead of the 
simply descriptive (ὁ ἔχων), St John 
deals with the exceptional presump- 


tion of men who regarded themselves 
as above the common law. In each 
case where this characteristic form of 
language occurs there is apparently a 
reference to some who had questioned 
the application of a general principle 
in particular cases (ve. 4, 6, 9, 10, 
15; 6. ii. 23, 27; iv. 7; v. 1, 4, 18; 2 
John 9). 

It is remarkable that this is the 
only place in which St John speaks 
of the Christian ‘Hope,’ a character- 
istic thought of St Paul and St Peter. 
St Peter speaks of a ‘living hope’ as 
the result of a new birth (1 Pet. i. 3). 

ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ] on Him, that is, as before, 
on God in Christ. 

The phrase ἔχειν ἐλπίδα ἐπί τινι 18 
not found elsewhere in the N.T. It is 
distinguished from ἐλπ. ἔχειν eis (Acts 
xxiv. 15) by the idea of ‘hope resting 
upon’ in place of ‘reaching unto’: and 
from the simple ‘hoping on’ (ἐλπίζειν 
ἐπί Rom. xv. 12; 1 Tim. iv. 10) by that 
of the enjoyment of possession. Comp. 
i. 3 note (κοινωνίαν ἔχειν). 

ἁγνίζει ἑαυτόν] purifieth himself. 
Personal effort is necessarily called out 
by a definite object of personal devo- 
tion. The believer’s act is the using 
what God gives. So Augustine writes: 
Quis nos castificat nisi Deus? Sed 
Deus te nolentem non castificat. Ergo 
quod adjungis voluntatem tuam Deo 
castificas teipsum. Castificas te non 
de te sed de illo qui venit ut habitet 
in te. Tamen quia agis ibi aliquid 
voluntate ideo et tibi aliquid tributum 
est. 

Comp. James iv. 8; 1 Pet. i. 22; 
2 Cor. vii. 1; 1 Tim. v. 22. 

ayviger] sanctificat V., castificat 
Aug.; purifieth. The thought pro- 
bably is derived from the ceremonial 
purification required before the ap- 
pearance in the Divine presence. Comp. 
John xi. 55 (Acts xxi. 24 ff.); Ex. xix. 
10. The spiritual correlative is marked 
Heb. x. το ff. 


III. 4] 
ἐκεῖνος ὧγνός ἐστιν. 


It is not easy to lay down sharply 
the distinction between ἁγνός, ἁγνίζειν 
and καθαρός, καθαρίζειν. As far as the 
usage of the N.T. is concerned, ἁγνός 
has a personal, an internal, reference 
which is wanting in καθαρός. ‘Ayvds 
suggests the notion of shrinking from 
contamination, of a delicate sensibility 
to pollution of any kind, while καθαρός 
expresses simply the fact of cleanness. 
“Ayvos marks predominantly a feeling, 
and καθαρός a state. ᾿Αγνεία comes as 
the result of an inward effort, καθα- 
porns by the application of some out- 
ward means. He of whom it is said 
that he ἁγνίζει ἑαυτόν not only keeps 
himself actually ‘pure,’ but disciplines 
and trains himself that he may move 
more surely among the defilements of 
the world (1 Tim. v. 22; 1 Pet. iii. 2). 
Both ἁγνός and καθαρός differ from 
ἅγιος in that they admit the thought 
or the fact of temptation or pollu- 
tion; while ἅγιος describes that which 
is holy absolutely, either in itself or 
in idea. God can be spoken of as 
ἅγιος but not as ἄγνός, while Christ 
can be spoken of as ἁγνός in virtue of 
the perfection of His humanity. A 
man is ἅγιος in virtue of his divine 
destination (Heb. x. 10; Is. iv. 3 Lxx.) 
to which he is gradually conformed 
(ἁγιάζεται, Heb. x. 14); he is ἁγνός in 
virtue of earthly, human discipline. 
Comp. note on Hebr. vii. 26. 

καθὼς ἐκ. ἁγνός ἐστιν) ecen as He 
(Christ) ts pure. The pronoun ἐκεῖ- 
vos, a8 throughout the Epistle (ii. 6 
note), refers to Christ. It is chosen 
here, though the preceding αὐτός re- 
fers to the same divine-human Per- 
son, in ‘order to emphasise the refer- 
ence to the Lord’s human life. It is 
in respect of this only that He can be 
spoken of as ἁγνός ; and in respect of 
His true humanity it can be said of 
Him that “He zs pure,” and not only 
that “He was pure.” The result of 
the perfection of His earthly disci- 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


IOI 
ὁ Πάς ὁ ποιῶν τὴν ἁμαρ- 


pline (Heb. v. 7 f£) still abides in His 
glorified state. For the change of 
pronouns compare Ὁ. 5; John vy. 39; 
xix. 35. 

2. The essential character of the 
children of God (iii. 4—9). 

The character of children of God is 
seen in relation to sin and righteous- 
ness. Sin is in its nature irreconcile- 
able with Christianity (ov. 4—6). Sin 
marks a connexion with the devil as 
righteousness with Christ (vv. 7, 8). 
Sin is impossible for the child of God 
(v. 9). The underlying thought of the 
action of false teachers (Ὁ. 7), who 
placed salvation in knowledge, is 
everywhere present. 

4—6. The nature of sin is con- 
sidered in itself as to its manifestation 
and its essence (v. 4); as to Christ 
both in His Work and in His Person 
(Ὁ. 5); and as to man negatively and 
positively (v. 6). 

«σοῦ one that doeth sin doeth 
also lawlessness ; and sin is lawless- 
ness. %And ye know that he was 
manifested, that he may take away 
sins; and in him is no sin. Every 
one that abideth in him sinneth not ; 
every one that sinneth hath not seen 
him neither knoweth him. 

4. The transition of thought from 
vv. I—3 lies in the idea of ‘ purifica- 
tion.’ This effort corresponds with 
the fulfilment of man’s true destiny, 
which Christ has again made possible. 
He who commits sin does in fact 
violate the divine law; and, more 
than this, sin and violation of the 
divine law are absolutely identical. 
The first clause deals with the prac- 
tical manifestation of sin and the se- 
cond with the innermost essence of it. 

In vv. 4, 5 the successive clauses 
are coordinated by καί.. «καί.. «καί. In 
ov. 6—8 clause follows clause without 
any conjunction. 

4. Πᾶς ὁ ποιῶν...} Hvery one that... 


102 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[TIE 4 


a \ « 4 ᾽ A © 
πίαν καὶ τὴν ἀνομίαν ποιεῖ, καὶ ἡ ἁμαρτία ἐστιν ἢ 


Comp. v. 3 note. The constant repe- 
tition of this form in this group of 
verses is very impressive. 

ὁ ποιῶν τὴν ap] gui facil pecca- 
tum (delictum Tert.) V., that doeth 
sin. The phrase is distinguished 
from the simple term ‘that sinneth’ 
(ὁ ἁμαρτάνων Ὁ. 6) by adding the con- 
ception of the actual realisation of 
sin as something which is definitely 
brought about. This conception is 
emphasised by the addition of the 
article (τὴν ἁμαρτίαν), The man does 
not simply commit a sin (was ὁ ἅμαρ- 
τίαν ποιῶν comp. v.9; I Pet. ii. 22; 2 
Cor. xi. 7), but realises sin in its com- 
pleteness, Comp. Eurip. Andr. fr. 150. 

Compare vz. 8, 9, John viii. 34 (τὴν 
ἅμ); and contrast James v. 15 κἂν 
ἁμαρτίας 7 πεποιηκώς. 

The corresponding phrase is ὁ ποιῶν 
τὴν δικαιοσύνην Ὁ. 7 (10), ii. 29. Sin 
as a whole (ἡ ἁμαρτία) answers to 
righteousness as a whole (ἡ δικαιοσύνη). 
For ἡ ἁμαρτία compare Rom. v. 12 
(ἁμαρτία τ. 13); 20 ἔ,, vi 1 ff 

καὶ τὴν ἀνομ. ποιεῖ] et iniguitatem 
Jacit V., doeth also lawlessness, vio- 
lates a law which claims his loyal 
obedience (comp. Matt. xiii. 41; vii. 23 
of ἐργαζόμενοι τὴν dvop.). And, yet 
more than this, 

ἡ ἁμαρτία ἐστὶν ἡ ἀνομία, peccatum 
est iniquitas V., sin is lawlessness, Sin 
and lawlessness are convertible terms. 
Sin is not an arbitrary conception. 
It is the assertion of the selfish will 
against a paramount authority. He 
who sins breaks not only by accident 
or in an isolated detail, but essentially 
the ‘law’ which he was created to 
fulfil. 

This ‘law’ which expresses the di- 
vine ideal of man’s constitution and 
growth has. three chief applications. 
There is the ‘law’ of each man’s per- 
sonal being: there is the ‘law’ of his 
relation to things without him: there 
is the ‘law’ of his relation to God. To 


violate any part of this threefold law 
is to sin, for all parts are divine. 
(James ii. 10.) 

The Mosaic Law was directed in a 
representative fashion to each of these 
spheres of duty. It touched upon 
man’s dealing with himself: upon his 
treatment of creation (of men, animals 
and crops): upon his duty towards 
God. In this way it was fitted to 
bring home to men the divine side of 
all action. 

The origin of sin in selfishness is 
vividly illustrated by St James (i. 14f.), 
who shews also that the neglect of 
duty, the violation of the lawof growth, 
is sin (James iv. 17). So St John lays 
down that ‘unrighteousness,’ the fail- 
ure to fulfil our obligations to others, 
is sin (c. v. 17). 

Other examples of the use of the 
article with both subject and predi- 
cate, when the two are convertible, 
occur: Apoc. xix. 10 ἡ μαρτυρία ᾿Ιησοῦ 
ἐστὶν τὸ πνεῦμα τῆς προφητείας ; Matt. 
vi. 22; 1 Cor. x. 4; xv. 56; Phil. iii. 
19; comp. John i. 4; xv. 1; 2 Cor. iii. 17. 
The variations in Matt. siii. 38 f. are 
instructive (ὁ ἀγρός ἐστιν ὁ κόσμος... 
ὁ θερισμὸς συντέλεια αἰῶνος). 

It is interesting to notice that Bede 
observes the inadequacy of the Latin 
rendering: Virtus hujus sententiz, 
he says, facilius in lingua Greecorum, 
qua edita est epistola, comprehenditur, 
siquidem apud eos iniguitas ἀνομία 
vocatur... Omnes enim qui peccant 
preevaricationis (Ps. cxix. 119 Lat.) 
rei sunt, hoc est non solum illi qui 
datam sibi scripte legis scientiam 
contemnunt, sed et illi qui innocentiam 
legis naturalis quam in protoplasto 
omnes accepimus sive infirmitate sive 
negligentia sive etiam ignorantia cor- 
rumpunt. 

For the change of order in the two 
clauses see v. 2 note. 

5. Not only is sin a violation of 
the law of man’s being: it sets at 


LIL. ς, 6] 


ἀνομία. 
ἁμαρτίας apn, Kae ἁμαρτία 
5 οἴδατε: οἴδαμεν δὲ the (lat). 

ἐν αὐ. οὐκ ἔ.: 


naught Christ’s mission. His work 
was to take away sins: He Himself 
was sinless. Thus the most elementary 
knowledge shews that sin is utterly 
alien from the faith. 

οἴδατε] scitis V., ye know. This 
appeal to the knowledge of Christians 
is characteristic of St John, though it 
is found also in St Paul: 6. 11. 20 f, 
iv. 2,14 ἢ, γ. 15, 18 f.note; 3 John 12. 

ἐκεῖνος ἐφαν.) tlle apparuit V., 
manifestatus est Aug., He was mani- 
Jested. The subject is not defined 
under any particular aspect (Lamb of 
God John i. 29, Son of God v. 8), but 
left in its fulness. For ἐκεῖνος see c. 
ii 6 note. It will be observed that in 
this verse ἐκεῖνος and αὐτός are natu- 
rally referred to the same subject. 
Comp. John xix. 35. 

ἐφανερώθη] was manifested. Comp. 
j. 2; ii. 28 notes. The ‘manifestation’ 
of the Lord includes the whole of His 
historical Life with its consequences : 
His Birth, and Growth, and Ministry, 
and Passion, and Resurrection, and 
Ascension. Each part of the Revela- 
tion contributed in some way to the 
removal of sins The Redemption 
and Atonement were wrought out by 
His living as well as by His dying. 

Compare Matt. viii. 17. 

The idea of ‘ manifestation’ in this 
connexion involves a previous being. 
Thus the term includes not only 6 ἦν 
dn’ ἀρχῆς but also ἦν ἐν ἀρχῇ. 

For the different phrases used by 
St John to describe the Incarnation 
see Additional Note. 

tva...dpn] ut peccatum (-ta Tert.) au- 
Serat Aug., ut peccata nostra tolleret 
V., that He may take away sins, not 
simply do away with the punishment 
of them. Comp. i. 9 note. 

Tollit autem et dimittendo que 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


τὰς Gp. 
οὐκ ἔ. 


103 


Skat οἴδατε ὅτι ἐκεῖνος ἐφανερώθη ἵνα τὰς 


6 


ἐν αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔστιν. πάς 


AB vg me syr hil: 
ἐν av. δὲ me the 


- ἡμῶν SNC the (lat). 


facta sunt et adjuvando ne fiant et 
perducendo ad vitam ubi fieri omnino 
non possint (Bede). 

For the sense of αἴρειν compare John 
i. 29 note; and Heb. x. 4 (adatpew 
dp.); id. τι (περιελεῖν ap.) notes. The 
dominant thought here is not that of 
the self-sacrifice of Christ, but of His 
utter hostility to sin in every shape. 
He came to remove all sins even as 
He was Himself sinless. It is true 
that Christ ‘took away’ sins by 
‘taking them upon Him,’ by ‘ bearing 
them,’ but the simple sense of ‘ bear- 
ing’ appears to be foreign to the 
context here, though it has found 
strong support in the parallel passage 
in the Gospel. 

The use of the plural ‘sins’ (ras ap.) 
distinguishes the exact conception of 
Christ’s work here from that given in 
John i. 29 (‘the sin of the world’). 
The idea is that of the manifold per- 
sonal realisations of the sin of humanity 
which Christ takes away. The phrase 
stands without further definition (sins 
not our sins) in order to include the ful- 
ness of the truth expressed in c. ii. 2. 

For the plural used absolutely see 
Rom. vii. 5; Col. i. 14; Heb. 1. 3; 
(James v.16; 1 Pet. 11. 24). [The com- 
mon reading in Eph. ii. 1 is wrong.] 

ἁμαρτία ἐν αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔστιν] The clause 
is independent and not to be con- 
nected with ὅτι. For the statement 
and the form of expression compare 
John vii. 18 ἀδικία ἐν αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔστιν. 
This fact at once explains how Christ 
could take away sin, and how sin is in- 
compatible with fellowship with Him. 
The tense (is not was) marks the 
eternal character of the Redeemer. 
All that belongs to His ‘perfected’ 
manhood (Heb. ii. το, v. 9) ‘is’ in Him 
no less than His unchanged Divinity. 


104 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IIL 6 


© 9 ’ ΄σ f 8 ς , ae © © “ > 
7 as O αμαρτανῶν OU 
Oo €V αὐτῷ μενων ουχ αμαρτανεέι vie μ ρ x. 


6 πᾶς ὁ ἁμ.: +xai vg syrvg 


The ‘purity’ of τ. 3 is traced back to 
its inherent source. 

The emphasis is thrown upon ‘sin,’ 
so that the literal rendering would be: 
‘sin in Him there is not.’ 

6. This verse flows directly from 
the last clause of τ. 5. True fellow- 
ship with Christ, Who is absolutely 
sinless, is necessarily inconsistent with 
sin; and, yet further, the practice of 
sin excludes the reality of a professed 
knowledge of Christ. ‘No one that 
abideth in Him sinneth’ 

μένων] St John speaks of ‘abiding’ 
in Christ and not simply of ‘being’ in 
Christ, because his argument rests on 
the efficacy of continuous human effort. 
Comp. ii. 5 note. 

οὐχ ἁμαρτάνει] sinneth not. The 
commentary on this phrase is found 
ἴῃ 6.1. 6. It describes a character, ‘a 
prevailing habit’ and not primarily an 
act. Comp. Tit. iii, 11; Hebr. x. 26. 
Each separate sinful act does as such 
interrupt the fellowship, and yet 80 
far as it is foreign to the character 
of the man, and removed from him (ii. 
1), it leaves his character unchanged. 
This is the truth which Augustine 
partially expresses when he says that 
the sin spoken of is the violation of 
love ; for love may be taken fairly to 
express the essence of the Christian 
character. Comp. c. v. 18 note. 

Compare John xiii. ro. 

Bede describes the fact as it is 
practically embodied when he says: in 
quantum in eo manet in tantum non 
peccat; but he leaves out of sight 
the internal spiritual character. 

πᾶς ὁ dp....0vde ἔγνωκεν αὐτόν] The 
interruption of the formal parallelism 
is characteristic of St John. Instead 
of saying ‘every one that sinneth a- 
bideth not in (is cut off from) Him,’ 
he substitutes a predicative clause 
which carries back the mind of the 
reader to an earlier stage of the fatal 


failure, as if he would say: ‘In such a 
case there is no question of ‘abiding.’ 
The conditions of fellowship have 
never been satisfied. Such a one hath 
not seen Christ (God in Christ) nor 
yet come to know Him, 

Compare i. 6 f. (‘fellowship with 
Him, ‘fellowship one with another’); 
i. 8, 9, ii. 4 f. (‘the truth is not in us,’ 
‘the love of God is perfected’); oz. 7, 
8; iv.5,6a;7b,8; v.10. Inii 23 
there is a perfect correspondence. 

οὐχ ἑώρ... αὐτόν] non vidit eum nec 
cognovit eum V., hath not seen... 
neither knoweth. The first word de- 
scribes the immediate and direct 
vision of Christ ; and the second the 
personal and detailed appropriation 
of the truth so presented to the eyes. 
‘Seeing’ expresses briefly the fullest 
exertion of our utmost faculties of 
gaining new elements of truth from 
without: ‘knowing’ (ἐγνωκέναι), the ap- 
prehension and coordination of the 
truth within. ‘Knowing’ is less direct 
and immediate and therefore forms 
the climax here. 

ἑώρακεν] Comp. c. iv. 20; 3 John 11; 
John i. 18, v. 37, vi. 46, xiv. 7, 9 (Heb. 
xi. 27). 

The use of the word here in con- 
nexion with Christ seems to point 
to some teachers who appealed to their 
personal sight of the Lord (comp. i. 
1 ff.; John xix. 35, xx. 29) as giving 
authority to their false doctrine. Of 
such in spite of outward intercourse 
it could be said that ‘they had not 
seen Christ’ (comp. 2 Cor. v. 16). 

οὐδὲ ἔγνωκεν ‘neither hath come to 
know,’ i.e. neither knoweth. The point 
regarded is present and not past. 
Comp. ii. 3 note. 

The statement leaves on one side 
the question of the indefectibility of 
grace. It deals with the actual state 
of the man, Past sight and past know- 
ledge cease to beunless they go forward. 


IIL. 7] 


er »_\ DL oF » ἡ 
εωρακεν QuTov οὐδὲ EYYWKEY αὕὑτον. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


105 


1Texvia, μηδεὶς 


, © Pg ἥν Lid A 2 fi [ἡ > 
πλανάτω ὑμᾶς" ὁ ποιῶν THY δικαιοσύνην δίκαιός ἐστιν, 


7 τεκνία NB vg syrr; παιδία AC me syrhlmg. 


Luther expressed the truth when 
he said ‘He who is a Christian is no 
Christian, 

7, 8. From considering the nature 
of sin St John passes on to consider 
the personal spiritual source with 
which it is connected as righteous- 
ness is connected with Christ. Sin is 
the sign of dependence on the devil 
whose works Christ came to abolish. 

7 Little children, let no one lead 
you astray: he that doeth righteous- 
ness is righteous, even as he is 
righteous: 8 he that doeth sin is of 
the devil, because the devil sinneth 
Jrom the beginning. Unto this end 
the Son of God was manifested that 
he may destroy the works of the devil. 

7. Texvia] Filioli V., Little chil- 
dren. See ii. 12 note. The tender- 
ness of the address is called out by the 
peril of the situation. 

μηδεὶς πλανάτω] nemo vos seducat 
V., let no one, even with the most 
plausible signs of authority (ii. 26), 
lead you astray. The question is one 
of action not of opinion. Comp. i. 8 
note. 

ὁ ποιῶν τὴν Ou.) he that doeth 
righteousness, he who gives effect to 
it in life, who realises it in conduct 
(c. ii. 29). Compare ‘doeth sin’ (0. 4 
note), ‘doeth the truth’ (c. i. 6 note). 

‘To do righteousness’ is more than 
‘to do righteous acts’ (ποιεῖν δίκαια, 
comp. I Pet. iii. 12 ποιεῖν κακά, James 
iv. 17 καλὸν π.), or even than ‘to do 
the acts of righteousness’ (ποιεῖν τὰ 
δίκαια, Comp. Ὁ. 22 π. τὰ ἀρεστά, Rom. 
iii. 8 π. τὰ κακά); and it differs from 
‘doing that which is righteous’ (7. τὸ 
δίκαιον, comp. Rom. xiii. 3 f. π. τὸ dya- 
Gov, τὸ κακόν) by presenting the idea 
in a less abstract form. Compare Col. 
iv. I (τὸ δίκαιον, τὴν ἰσότητα) ; iii. 5 
(ἀκαθαρσίαν, τὴν πλεονεξίαν). 


μή τις Α. - τὴν΄ dix. R*. 

The exact phrase is different in 
form from the negative phrase (0. 10 
note). ‘Righteousness’ here is the 
virtue in its completeness and unity 
(τὴν δικαιοσύνην): in Ὁ. 10 δικαιοσύνη 
expresses any particular manifestation 
of righteousness. Comp. ii. 29; Matt. 
ae 

δίκαιός éorw] Righteousness is the 
sign of divine sonship (c. ii. 29). The 
‘doing righteousness’ reveals the cha- 
racter and does not create it. The 
man who is righteous is recognised by 
his actions. The personal character 
underlies the deeds. The form of the 
sentence may be compared with John 
iii. 31 he that is of the earth is of 
the earth and speaketh of the earth. 

καθώς] sicut V., even as. Christ 
(ἐκεῖνος α. ii. 6 note) is the One Type 
of righteousness. The Christian’s 
righteousness, like that of his Master, 
must extend to the fulness of life. 
Comp. v. 3; ii. 6; iv. 17; John xiii. 
1§; XV. 12; xvil. 14. 

Augustine (whom Bede transcribes) 
remarks on this comparison between 
the righteousness of the believer and 
the righteousness of Christ (see Ὁ. 2): 
Videtis quia non semper sicut ad 
parilitatem et sequalitatem refertur... 
Habemus et nos imaginem Dei, sed 
non illam quam habet Filius equalis 
Patri. 

δίκαιός ἐστιν] ii. 29; iv. 17; Ὁ. 3 notes. 
Christ gave the complete example of 
the fulfilment of all man’s offices, 
In Him righteousness was and is the 
expression of love. 

8. The opposite to o 7 is ex- 
pressed with characteristic variations 
in the parallelism : 

(a) ὁ π. τὴν dex. || ὁ ποιῶν τὴν ἅμ. 

(Ὁ) δίκαιός ἐστιν || ἐκ τοῦ διαβ. ἐστίν. 

(c) καθὼς ἐ. δ. é. || ὅτι...ὁ διάβ. ap. 

The spiritual affinity (Ὁ) is in the 


106 


a , vy - 
καθὼς ἐκεῖνος δίκαιος ἐστιν 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[III. 8 


΄ \ 7 
86 ποιῶν τὴν ἁμαρτίαν ἐκ 


im ᾽ « > ἃ ᾽ “- ε ΄ © 
τοῦ διαβόλου ἐστίν, ὅτι ἀπ ἀρχῆς ὁ διάβολος apap- 


Ψ' 
TAaVEl. 


= , \ « ~ ¢ ΄ 
εἰς τοῦτο ἐφανερώθη ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ ἵνα λύση 


8 ὁ ποιῶν : ὁ δὲ 7. A me (lat). 


one case described by the personal 
character, in the other, directly ; while 
man’s character is shewn to be in each 
case though under different relations 
(καθώς, ὅτι), a reflection of his spi- 
ritual master (c). 

ὁ π. τὴν ἀμ. v. 4 note. 

ἐκ τοῦ διαβ. ἐστίν] ex (de, a, all.) 
diabolo est V., is of the devil, draws 
from him the ruling principles of his 
life, as his child. Comp. ii. 16 note; 
and Additional Note on v. 1. The 
phrase finds a parallel in was of the 
evil one, Ὁ. 12; and John viii. 44 ye 
are of your father, the devil. Com- 
pare ‘to be of the things below’ John 
viii. 23; tobe of the world xvii. τό, &c., 
c. ii. 16. Additional Note on Ὁ. 1. 

It will be noticed that as St Paul 
traces back sin to the act of the typi- 
cal representative of mankind, Adam 
(Rom. v. 14; 1 Cor. xv. 22), so St 
John traces it back yet further to a 
spiritual origin. 

Augustine remarks that the devil 
is not treated in Scripture as the 
author of any being: Neminem fecit 
diabolus, neminem genuit, neminem 
creavit. Sed quicunque fuerit imi- 
tatus diabolum quasi de illo natus 
sit filius diaboli imitando non proprie 
nascendo. In this connexion it is re- 
markable that Origen, while he dis- 
tinctly notices that in relation tu the 
devil St John says ἐστίν ἐκ and not 
γεγέννηται ἐκ (γεγεννημένος ἐστὶν ἐκ) (in 
Joh. xx. § 13, iv. 325), elsewhere gives 
ἐκ τοῦ διαβόλου γεγένηται (γεγέννηται) 
(Hom. ix. in Jer. § 4, iii. 181; Sch. in 
Jer. xii. 10, iii. 290; Hom. vi. in 
Ezech. § 3, iii. 377, Lat.) in quoting 
the verse freely. 

For St John’s teaching on the powers 
of evil see Additional Note on ii. 13, 

Srt...apapraver] because...the begin- 


ning. The force of the argument lies in 
the recognition of the state of things 
at the first dawn of human history. 
From the very beginning we see a 
power in action hostile to God. Be- 
tween these two, as between light and 
darkness, there can be no middle 
term. He who does not belong to 
the one belongs to the other. Cha- 
racter reveals the choice. The posi- 
tion of dw ἀρχῆς at the head of 
the clause emphasises the thought. 
Contrast i. 1; ii. 7; 111. 11; and com- 
pare ii. 24 note. 

ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς] ab initio V., a primor- 
dio Tert., from the beginning. Comp. 
i. 1; ii. 7 notes. Sin exists before 
man. 

ἁμαρτάνει] sinneth. See Ὁ. 6 note. 
His sinful action is continuous and 
present: subjunxit verbum presentis 
temporis quia ex quo ab initio ccepit 
diabolus peccare nunquam desiit 
(Bede). 

εἰς τοῦτο] in hoc V. (ideo, idcirco 
all.), unto this end, which has been 
included in the preceding clauses and 
is defined by what follows. 

ἐφανερώθη) See Ὁ. 5 note. 

ὁ vids τοῦ θεοῦ) the Son of God. 
The title of dignity is now expressed 
for the first time in the Epistle to 
bring out the nature of the conflict (c. 
iv. 4). Hitherto the Christ has been 
spoken of under the title ‘the Son’ 
(ii. 22, 23, 24), or more fully ‘His (1.6. 
the Father’s) Son’ (i. 3). Hencefor- 
ward ‘the Son of God’ is His most 
common name (iv. 15; v. 5, 9 ff., 20). 
The spiritual adversary of man has 
a mightier spiritual antagonist. A 
second Adam answers to the first 
Adam: the Son of God to the devil. 

, λύσῃ] dissolvat V., soleat Aug, 
destroy. ‘The works of the devil’ are 


111. 9] 


τὰ ἔργα τοῦ διαβόλου. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


107 


~ εν Ψ 
πάς ὁ γεγεννημένος ἐκ τοῦ 


a“. © f - of / fol ᾽ o 
θεοῦ ἁμαρτίαν οὐ ποιεῖ, ὅτι σπέρμα αὐτοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ 


represented as having a certain con- 
sistency, and coherence. They shew 
a kind of solid front. But Christ by 
His coming has revealed them in their 
complete unsubstantiality. He has 
‘undone’ the seeming bonds by which 
they were held together. 

The word Avew occurs literally in 
this sense Acts xxvii. 41. Comp. 
Eph. ii. 14; John ii. 19, and 2 Pet. iii. 
1o—12; and Acts v. 38; Gal. ii. 18; 
Rom. xiv. 20 &c. (καταλύειν). 

The transition to the figurative 
sense is seen in Acts xiii. 43 (λυθείσης 
τῆς συναγωγῆς), ii, 24. Comp. Ign. 
Eph. 13 καθαιροῦνται ai δυνάμεις τοῦ 
Σατανᾶ καὶ λύεται ὁ ὄλεθρος αὐτοῦ ἐν 
τῇ ὁμονοίᾳ ὑμῶν τῆς πίστεως. 

The two objects of the ‘manifesta- 
tion’ of Christ (vv. 5, 8) cover the 
whole work of redemption, ‘to take 
away sins,’ ‘to destroy the works of 
the devil.’ 

In this connexion ‘the works of the 
devil’ are gathered up in ‘sin’ which 
is their spring. This the devil has 
wrought in men and in the world, 
and men make his works their own. 
Comp. John viii. 41. These works 
under different aspects are spoken of 
as ‘works of darkness’ (Rom. xiii. 12; 
Eph. v. 11), and ‘of the flesh’ (Gal. v. 
19). They stand opposed to ‘the 
works of God’ (John ix. 3) and ‘the 
works of the Christ’ (Matt. xi.2). Au- 
gustine brings the thought of ‘de- 
stroying the works of the devil’ into 
connexion with man’s natural and spi- 
ritual births: Si cum nullo peccato 
nascimur, quid est quod cum infanti- 
bus ad baptismum curritur ut absol- 
vantur? Ergo duas nativitates at- 
tendite fratres, Adam et Christi... 
Nativitas illa trahit secum peccatum, 
nativitas ista liberat a peccato. 

9. The antagonism of the Christian 
to sin is now placed in its last and de- 
cisive aspect. Two things are affirmed 


of him: ‘he doeth no sin’ and ‘he 
cannot sin.” The first fact follows 
from the permanence of the vital 
power by which he is animated. The 
second from the nature of that power, 
that it is of God. In the second case 
the ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ is placed emphatically 
first ; ‘he cannot sin, because it is of 
God, and of no other, that he hath 
been born.’ 

9 Every one that is begotten of God 
doeth no sin, because his seed abideth 
in him; and he cannot sin because he 
ts begotten of God. 

ὁ γεγεννημένος ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ] gui natus 
est ex Deo V., that is begotten of Οοά. 
Comp. ii. 29. The phrase occurs here 
first in the epistle in its full form. 
Comp. iv. 7, v. I (4), 18. 

John i. 13 (iii. 3, 5 ff). 

The exact form is important. The 
perfect (ὁ γεγεννημένος) marks not only 
the single act (aor. ἐγεννήθησαν John 
i. 13; 6. v. 18) but the continuous 
presence of its efficacy. ‘He that 
hath been born and still remains a 
child of God? See Additional Note 
on Ὁ. I. 

ἁμαρτίαν ov ποιεῖ] Compare Ὁ. 4 
note. A fine phrase of Athenagoras 
will serve as a comment on this view 
of the Christian life: οἷς ὁ Bios ὡς 
πρὸς στάθμην τὸν θεὸν κανονίζεται 
(‘Christians for whom the conception 
of God is the ideal standard of life’) 
«οοἴστε τούτους, μηδ᾽ εἰς ἔννοιάν ποτε τοῦ 
βραχυτάτου ἐλευσομένους ἁμαρτήματος 
(Leg. pro Christ. c. 31). 

σπέρμα αὐτοῦ] semen ipsius V., his 
seed, the principle of life which He 
has given continues to be the ruling 
principle of the believer's growth. 
God gives, as it were, of Himself to 
the Christian. He does not only work 
upon him and leave him. The germ 
of the new life is that out of which 
the mature man will in due time be 
developed. Comp. John i. 13. 


108 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[III. 10 


id .« ΄ ~ 
μένει, καὶ οὐ δύναται ἁμαρτάνειν, OTL ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ 


10? 


γεγέννηται. 


, A Ὰ 
Εν τούτῳ φανερα ἐστιν τὰ Τέκνα 


a ΄ \ - ͵ cou \ - 
τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τὰ τέκνα τοῦ διαβόλου: πᾶς ὁ μὴ ποιῶν 


The instrument by which this vital 
element is conveyed is the ‘word’: 
James i. 18; 1 Pet. i. 23; Luke viii. 
12, 15. 

The absence of the article (σπέρμα 
not τὸ σπέρμα) directs attention to 
the character of the divine principle 
and not to the divine principle com- 
municated in the particular case. See 
Ὁ. 10 note. 

ov δύναται ἁμ. he cannot sin. The 
ideas of divine sonship and sin are 
mutually exclusive. As long as the re- 
lationship with God is real (ὅτι ἐκ θεοῦ 
yeyévv.) sinful acts are but accidents. 
They do not touch the essence of the 
man’s being. The impossibility of 
sinning in such a case lies in the moral 
nature of things. Comp. John τ. 19, 
30, xii. 39, xiv. 17, &c. 

Augustine again insists that the 
reference is to the great command- 
ment of love: Est quoddam peccatum 
quod non potest admittere ille qui 
natus est ex Deo, et quo non admisso 
solvuntur cetera, quo admisso confir- 
mantur cetera. Quod est hoc pec- 
catum? Facere contra mandatum 
Christi, contra testamentum uovum 
(John xiii. 34). The explanation is 
true so far as love is the deter- 
mining element in the Christian cha- 
racter. 


3. The outward manifestation of 
the children of God (10—12). 


The spiritual affinities of men are 
shewn by two patent signs, righteous- 
ness and love (Ὁ. 10); and these signs 
correspond to two archetypal pat- 
terns, the Gospel, that is, the Life of 
Christ (v. 11), and the history of Cain 
(Ὁ. 12). 

το 7, this the children of God are 
manifest and the children of the 
devil: every one that doeth not 


righteousness is not of God, and he 
that loveth not his brother. ** Be- 
cause this is the message which ye 
heard from the beginning that we 
should love one another: *not as 
Cain was of the wicked one and slew 
his brother; and wherefore slew he 
him? because his own works were 
evil and his brother’s righteous. 

1o. Life reveals the children of 
God. They bear characteristic marks 
which stamp their action and their 
feeling, their conduct and the motive 
of their conduct. They embody right- 
eousness in deed. They acknowledge 
the ties which Christ has established 
among Christians and so potentially 
among men. They practically realise 
the law of man’s original constitution, 
and the law of man’s redemption. 

Ἐν τούτῳ] In hoc V.(£x hoc ¥.), In 
this, in this fact of the essential sin- 
lessness of the Christian’s life, which 
is followed out into its main aspects 
in the verse which follows (comp. c. 
ii. 3 note). 

τὰ τέκνα τοῦ θεοῦ] silti Dei V., the 
children of God. See v. 1 note. 

St John divides the world sharply 
into two classes. Looking at the spirit- 
ual characteristics of life he admits no 
intermediate class. For him there is 
only light and darkness, and no twi- 
light. He sees only ‘life’ and ‘death’ 

φανερά] manifesti V., manifestati 
Aug., manifest, so that all men may 
see what they are: Matt. xii. 16; Acts 
vii. 13; 1 Cor. xi. 19. That which is 
in its essence secret is thus revealed 
before the eyes of men. Comp. Mark 
iv. 22; 2 Cor. v. 1of. 

τὰ τέκνα τοῦ διαβόλου] flit diadolé 
V., the children of the devil. The 
phrase is unique. Compare Eph. ii. 3 
τέκνα φύσει ὀργῆς. 2 Pet. ii. 14 κα- 
tdpas τέκνα. And also: Matt. xiii. 38 


III. rr] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


109 


‘ la ΄ “ ΄ 
δικαιοσύνην οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ ὁ μὴ ἀγαπῶν 
\ ν᾿ - ἐξ / a 
τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ. “oti αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἀγγελία ἣν 


Io ὁ μὴ ποιῶν dix. NABC me syrr (lat): ὁ μὴ ὧν δίκαιος vg the syrhlmg. 


δικαιοσύνην SB: τὴν dx. AC. Comp. v. 7. 


the syrr (lat). Comp. i. 5. 
οἱ viol τοῦ πονηροῦ; Xxiii. 15 vids γεέν- 
νης; Acts xiii. 10 υἱὲ διαβόλου. 

πᾶς ὁ μὴ w.d.] Every one... Com- 
pare v. 3 note. By expressing the 
characterisation of Divine sonship in 
a negative form, St John enforces the 
necessary universality of the condi- 
tion which he lays down, and gives a 
pointed warning against those who 
trusted in the Christian name. It is 
not only true that every one that 
doeth righteousness ‘hath been born 
of God’ (ii. 29) and ‘is of God’ (3 John 
11) and shares the character of Christ 
(2. 7), but it is true also that to do 
righteousness is a necessity for him 
who is of God. A Christian must be 
active and not passive only. To fail 
either in deed or in word (c. iv. 3 ὁ μὴ 
ὁμολογεῖ) is fatal to the reality of the 
divine connexion. 

ὁ μὴ ποιῶν δικ.] gui non est justus 
V. (qui non facit justitiam F.), that 
doeth not righteousness. It has been 
already noticed (v. 7 note) that the 
phrase used here is different from 
that used in 2. 7, ii. 29. Here ‘right- 
eousness’ (δικαιοσύνη) expresses that 
which bears a particular character : in 
the former passage ‘righteousness’ 
(ἡ δικαιοσύνη) expresses: the idea 
realised in its completeness. The 
same general distinction is to be 
observed in the use of other like 
words in the Epistle: ἁμαρτία vv. 
5, 9, v. 16 f.3 ἡ ἁμαρτία vv. 4, 8; 
ἀγάπη iv. 8, τό; ἡ ἀγάπη (ii. 5, 15), 
11. 16, iv. 7, 10, 12, 16 ff. (v. 3); ζωή 
Ὁ. 15, V. II, 13, 16, 20; ἡ ζωή i. 2, ii. 
25, iii. 14, v. 12; ἀλήθεια 3 John 3; 
ἡ ἀλήθεια i. 6, 8, ii. 4, 21, 111. 19, iv. 6, 
y. 6; 2 Jobn 1, 2; 3 John 8. 

The full force of the article will also 
be felt in the following places: i. 6 ἐν 


ir ἀγγελία AB vg: ἐπαγγελία NC me 


τῷ σκότει, li. g ἐν τῷ φωτί, 111. 4 ἡ 
ἀνομία, iv. 18 τῇ γλώσσῃ, V. 10 τὴν 
μαρτυρίαν (Vv. 21 τῶν εἰδώλων). On the 
other hand the absence of the article 
in the following places is significant: 
in ii. 18 ἐσχάτη ὥρα, Ὁ. 9 σπέρμα. 
From the nature of the case anar- 
throus forms occur in predicates and 
negative sentences: yet see iii. 4, v. 6. 

οὐκ ἔ. ἐ τ. 6.| Comp. iv. 3 note; 
Additional Note on Ὁ. 1. 

καὶ ὁ μὴ dy. τ. ad.) and he that loveth 
not his brother. Comp. ii. 10 note. 
This clause is not a mere explanation 
of that which precedes but the ex- 
pression of it in its highest Christian 
form. Righteousness involves the ful- 
filment of all law, of relations to God 
and to man, both personally and 
socially. The love of Christian for 
Christian, resting on the sense of a 
divine fellowship (c. i. 3) carries for- 
ward to its loftiest embodiment the 
righteousness which man can reach. 

Augustine says in striking words 
which were adopted by Bede: Quid- 
quid vis habe; hoc solum [caritatem] 
non habeas: nihil tibi prodest. Alia 
si non habeas hoc habe, et implesti 
legem. 

11, 12. The revelation of character 
is traced back to the type given in 
the portraiture of the first fulfilment 
of man’s ideal in the Gospel, and of 
the first sin after the Fall. 

11. ὅτι... Because... The whole 
aim of the Gospel is the creation and 
strengthening of love. To this Christ’s 
life of sacrifice pointed from first to 
last. The record of His life is the 
message of the Gospel. 

ἡ ἀγγελία) adnuntiatio V., manda- 
tum F., repromissto (ἐπαγγελία) Lucf., 
the message. Comp. i. 5 note. 


10 


ἠκούσατε ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς, ἵνα cya sey ἀλλήλους" 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[III. 12 


τὰ οὐ Ka- 


θὼς Καὶν ἐκ τοῦ πονηροῦ ἦν καὶ ἔσφαξεν τὸν ἀδελφὸν 
αὐτοῦ: Kal χάριν τίνος ἔσφαξεν αὐτόν; ὅτι τὰ ἔργα 
αὐτοῦ πονηρὰ ἦν, τὰ δὲ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ αὐτοῦ δίκαια. 


ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς] from the beginning. See 
ii. 7 note. The first tidings of Chris- 
tianity contain this lesson. 

ἵνα ἀγαπῶμεν Gdd.] ut diligatis al- 
terutrum V., diligamus invicem Aug., 
that we love one another... The 
words do not simply give the con- 
tents of the message, but its aim, its 
purpose. The fundamental declara- 
tion of Christ’s Life and Work is 
directed to this end, that men should 
be moved by it to self-sacrifice. For 
this use of ἵνα see Ὁ. 23; iv. 215 
John sili. 34; xv. 12, 17. The par- 
ticle not unfrequently expresses an 
effort or an aim suggested by the 
words which precede: ὁ. v. 3; iv. 
17; 2 John 6; John iv. 34; vi. 29; 
viii 56; xv. 13; xvii. 3. Sometimes 
it indicates a divine purpose which is 
not at once obvious: v. 1; i.9; John 
xii. 23; xvi. 2, 32. 

The phrase ‘to love one another’ 
(v. 23 note) differs in shade of mean- 
ing from ‘loving the brethren’ (Ὁ. 14). 
‘Loving one another’ expresses the 
full social energy of the Christian 
life: ‘loving the brethren’ points to 
the personal feeling of one towards 
the body. 

12. ov καθώς... not as... The con- 
struction is irregular and elliptical. 
Comp. John vi. 58. The clause with- 
out the negative would have run on 
naturally with δ. 10 ...‘that loveth 
not his brother, even as Cain was of 
the evil one and slew his brother.’ 
Cain shewed his dependence on the 
devil by want of love and hatred 
of righteousness. But the insertion 
of v. 11, the positive rule of Chris- 
tians, leads to the insertion of the 
negative before the typical example 
of the opposite character. ‘We do 
not (or We shall not) present the 


type of ee even as Cain was 
of the evil one...’ ‘The case is not 
with us as it was with Cain; he 
was of the evil one...’ The use of 
the direct negative ov requires that 
the sentence should be treated as 
independent and not connected with 
ἵνα (μηδὲ ὦμεν ἐκ τοῦ πονηροῦ καθὼς 
Καίν.. 

The history of the first death na- 
turally attracted wide attention as 
presenting i in a representative and im- - 
pressive form the issues of selfishness, 
self-will, sin. Comp. Jude 11; Heb. . 
xi. 4; xii. 24. Philo discusses the 
history in a special book. In Clem. 
Hom. iii, 25 it is said of Cain: φονεὺς 
ἦν καὶ ψεύστης καὶ μετὰ ἁμαρτιῶν qov- 
χάζειν μηδὲ ἐ ἐπὶ τῷ ἄρχειν θέλων. 

ἐκ τοῦ πονηροῦ ἦν] ex maligno erat 
V., was of the evil one. Comp. Ὁ. ὃ ἐκ 
ποῦ διαβόλου ἐστίν note; ii. 13 τὸν 
πονηρόν note. The name is chosen 
here in order to connect the works of 
Cain (πονηρὰ ἣν) with their spiritual 
source. 

ἔσφαξεν] occidit V., slew. The word 
occurs elsewhere in the N.T. only in the 
Apocalypse. It expresses properly the 
slaughter of a victim. Here it seems 
to point to the deliberate determina- 
tion of the murder. 

καὶ χάριν rivos...] e propter quid 
V., and wherefore... This unusual 
mode of expression (comp. Ὁ. 17), 
appears to be adopted in order to bring 
out sharply that the murder of a 
brother came from hatred of righte- 
ousness. Cain lost practical sympathy 
with his brother; and so in the end 
he slew him. 

This use of χάριν occurs in this 
place only in the writings of St John. 
Elsewhere in the N.T. it stands (as 
generally) after its case. It expresses 


II. 13] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


111 


13 Μὴ θαυμάζετε, ἀδελφοί, εἰ μισεῖ ὑμᾶς ὁ κόσμος. 


13 μὴ θαυμ. ABC" vg me the syrhl: -Ὁ καὶ΄ μὴ θαυμ. NC* syrve. 


SABC vg: Ἔμου ς΄ me the syrr. 


commonly an object aimed at (Eph. 
iii. 1, 14; 1 Tim. v. 14; Gal. iii, 19, 
Legtft. &c.), but also an antecedent 
ground (Luke vii. 47). 

ὅτι... because... The explanation 
given is an interpretation of the his- 
tory in Gen. iv. The sacrifices (Heb. 
xi. 4) answered to the characters of 
the brothers, and God’s judgment 
upon them gave occasion for the open 
revelation of character which followed. 

Augustine traces the temptation of 
Cain to envy: Qui invidet non amat. 
Peccatum diaboli est in illo... Cecidit 
enim et invidit stanti. Non ideo vo- 
luit dejicere ut ipse staret sed ne 
solus caderet. 


III. ΒΕΟΤΉΒΒΗΟΘΟΡ in CarisT AND 
THE HATRED OF THE WORLD (ili. 13 
—24). 

There appear to be three main di- 
visions of the section: 


1. Hatred and love (13—15). 

2. The manifestation of love (16 
—18). 

3. The fruit of love (19—24). 

St John starts from the thought of 
hatred as the characteristic of the 
world. Over against this is love, the 
necessary sign of the presence of the 
new life of Christians. This love must 
be moulded on the pattern of Christ’s 
sacrifice, and extend to the fulness of 
life. And the fruit of love is confidence, 
which issues in perfect sympathy. 


1. Hatred and love (13—15). 

The thought of Cain leads to the 
consideration of the Cain-like charac- 
ter. Hatred is the mark of the world, 
which is ‘dead’ (13). Love among 
Christians is the sign of a new life 
(14). And consequently hatred among 
Christians is the sign not only of the 
absence of life but of the destruction 
of life (15). 


ἀδελφοί 


3 Marvel not, brethren, tf the world 
hateth you. 4*We know that we have 
passed out of death into life, because 
we love the brethren: he that loveth 
not abideth in death. Every one that 
hateth his brother is a murderer; 
and ye know that no murderer hath 
eternal life abiding in him. 

13. Love has been presented as 
the necessary mark of the Christian. 
Still it is met by hatred. This how- 
ever cannot but be so. Love is the 
sign of a change from death to life. 
They who remain in death must shew 
their real nature (hatred) towards the 
living. Terrible as Cain’s history is, 
it is still realised in essence. 

Μὴ θαυμάζετε) Nolite mirari V., 
Marvel not. For the thought com- 
pare John xv. 18 Β΄, xvi. 1 ff. 

The words occur again John v. 28, 
and in another form John iii. 7 μὴ 
θαυμάσῃς. The latter place is the only 
example in the Gospel or Epistles 
(John xix. 24 is not strictly parallel) 
of the imperative construction of μή 
with aor. subj. which occurs more fre- 
quently than the construction with 
pres. imp. in the Apocalypse (vi. 6, vii. 
3, Χ. 4, Xi. 2, xxii. 10). A comparison 
of John iii. 7 with the present passage 
brings out the difference of meaning 
in the two constructions. There the 
thought is of the special feeling a- 
roused by the single statement, here 
of the continuous feeling stirred by 
the whole temper of men (comp. ii. 
15, iv. 1). Comp. 1 Pet. ii. 17; John 
ii. 16 note. 

For θαυμάζειν εἰ see Mark xv. 44. 

ἀδελφοί] brethren. This is the only 
place in the Epistle where this title of 
address is used (ii.7 is a false reading). 
It contains an implicit argument. By 
emphasising the new relation in which 
Christians stand one to another it im- 
plies that this position of necessary 


112 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IIT. 14 


~ 2 / , a , 2 
τή μεῖς οἴδαμεν OTL μεταβεβήκαμεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτου εἰς 
\ foog » a ee) roo. too - 
τὴν ζωήν, OTL ἀγαπῶμεν Tous ἀδελῴφους" ὁ μὴ ἀγαπῶν 


14 τοὺς ἀδ.-Ε ἡμῶν N syrvg. 
me syrr. 


mutual affection is characteristic of 
them as distinguished from other men 
(‘the world’). The title is common 
in St James (ἀδελφοί, ἀδελφοί pov), 
and not unfrequent in St Paul and in 
the Epistle to the Hebrews. It is not 
found in the first Epistle of St Peter 
or δύ Jude. 

The three forms which St John 
borrows from the family to express 
Christian relations preserve each their 
proper meaning. ‘ Brethren’ expresses 
the idea of Christian equality in virtue 
of the common life: ‘Children’ (rexvia) 
that of spiritual dependence in the 
order of the new life with the pro- 
spect of growth: ‘Little ones’ (παιδία) 
that of subordination and immaturity. 
In contrast with these ‘Beloved’ is 
simply the personal manifestation of 
feeling. 

εἰ μισεῖ] si odit V., if...hateth you. 
This is assumed as a fact (comp. ὁ. iv. 
11; v. 9; John xv. 18); and by the 
order the stress is thrown here upon 
the verb and not (as in John xv. 
18 ff.) upon the pronoun or the sub- 
ject. Hatred is characteristic of ‘the 
world’ (mundus V., hic mundus F.). 

14. ἡμεῖς οἴδαμεν] nos scimus V. 
We (ἡμεῖς) as distinguished from the 
world, know by the essential nature 
of our faith, by our own inward experi- 
ence....The fact that we are conscious 
of a love for Christians as Christians 
is a proof to us that we have entered 
upon a new life: that we now first 
truly live. The passage has been 
made: the new sphere of being has 
been gained. Life is not future but 
present. Compare the simple οἴδαμεν 
in Ὁ. 2. 

μεταβεβήκαμεν] translati sumus V., 
have passed... Comp. John v. 24 (xiii, 
1). This love was indeed the accept- 


ὁ μὴ dy. SAB vg.: +7dv ἀδελφόν [αὐτοῦ] “Ὁ 


ance in faith of Christ’s ‘word’ (c. ii. 
7, iii. 11). 

ἐκ τοῦ O. εἰς τὴν ¢.] de morte in vitam 
V., out af death into life. Death and 
life are regarded as the two spheres 
in which men move, and they are pre- 
sented in their substantive fulness 
‘the death which is truly death,’ ‘the 
life which is truly life’ (ὁ θάνατος, ἡ 
ζωή). ὋὉ θάνατος is found here and 
in the following clause in St John’s 
Epistles; in the Gospel it occurs only 
in the parallel v. 24 (xi. 13 is different). 
Ὃ θάνατος is personified in Apoc. i. 18, 
vi. 8, ix. 6, xx. 13 f. (xxi. 4). Compare 
Acts ii. 24; Rom. v. 12 ff, viii. 2; 1 
Cor. xv. 21 ff.; 2 Cor. iv. 12; 2 Tim. 1. 
10 (opposed to ζωή); Heb. ii. 14. For 
ἡ ζωή compare i. 2 note; John v. 24; 
Matt. vii. 14 (opposed to ἡ ἀπώλεια), 
xviii. 8 ἢ, xix. 17; (Mark ix. 43, 45); 
Acts iii. 15; 2 Cor. v. 4. The depth 
of the expression is lost both in Latin 
and in English. 

‘To enter into life’ (εἰσελ. εἰς τὴν C.) is 
a phrase characteristic of St Matthew 
(xviii. 8 f., xix. 17; comp. vii. 14) and 
of St Mark (ix. 43, 45). In this 
largest sense ‘life’ (ἡ ζωή) is the fulfil- 
ment of the highest idea of being: 
perfect truth in perfect action. Com- 
pare 2 Tim. i. 10 καταργήσαντος μὲν 
τὸν θάνατον φωτίσαντος δὲ ζωὴν καὶ 
ἀφθαρσίαν, where in the second mem- 
ber the thought is of ‘life’ in the 
abstract and not of the Christian ful- 
filment of the whole conception of life. 

Grt...6rt.--] quoniam...quoniam... 
V., that...because... Active love is the 
sign of life and not the ground of life. 
Comp. Luke vii. 47. The connexion 
is ‘we know because...’ and not ‘we 
have passed because...’ 

tous a6.] the brethren. The simple 
phrase (3 John 5, 10) is more expres- 


IIL. 15] 


a a a 
μένει ἐν τῷ OavaTo. 
é é 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


113 


- σ 7 A 
ὁ πᾶς ὃ μισών τὸν ἀδελφὸν 


᾽ fal ᾽ £ ? Τὰ \ of of > τ 
αὐτοῦ ἀνθρωποκτόνος ἐστίν, καὶ οἴδατε ὅτι πᾶς ἀν- 


/ ᾽ at \ > 7 2 ἄς τὰ , 
θρωποκτόνος οὐκ EXEL ζωὴν QLWVLOV EV avuTw μένου- 


15 ἑαυτοῦ Β. 


sive than ‘our brethren’ This is the 
only place in which the exact words 
occur (dy. τοὺς ἀδελφούς). Elsewhere 
St John says ay. ἀλλήλους (Ὁ. 11 note). 
Ay. τὸν ad. Occurs 11. 10; 111. 10; iv. 20. 

See Additional Note. 

In view of the imperfection of 
Christians Augustine says: Viget 
[gloria caritatis] sed adhuc in hieme: 
viget radix sed quasi aridi sunt rami. 
Intus est medulla que viget, intus 
sunt folia arborum, intus fructus; sed 
zestatem expectant. 

ὁ μὴ ἀγαπῶν] qui non diligit V., 
he that loveth not. The omission of 
his brother, according to the true 
text, strengthens the thought. The 
feeling is regarded in its completest 
form. 

μένει ἐν τῷ 0.) abideth (permanet 
F.) in death. There is a moral vis 
inertie. It is not said that he dies. 
Death is his natural state. It fol- 
lows that love and life are convertible 
terms. Si in morte manet qui non 
diligit, in qua morte manet qui odit? 
(Petr. Ven. [ap. Bernard. Epp.] Ep. 
229 ὃ 5.) 

Compare John iii. 36. 

15. The hatred of ‘the world’ can 
cause no marvel: it is, in a certain 
sense, natural. But hatred may find 
place among ‘the brethren’ (ii. 9, 11). 
There are Cains in the new family. 
Such hatred is essentially identical 
with murder, not simply as being the 
first step towards it but as involving 
the same moral position. It is more- 
over in the man himself the destruc- 
tion of that life which is love. 

πᾶς 6...] Every one that hateth... 
though he bear the name of Christ. 
Comp. c. iii. 3. 

ἀνθρωποκτόνος} homicida V., mur- 
derer. The word is used of the devil, 


W. J. 


auvrw Β: ἑαυτῷ NAC. 


John viii. 44. Among men Cain is 
the type. 

οἴδατε] ye know. Comp. ἃ v. 18 
note. 

was...oux...] Comp. ii. 19 note. 

πᾶς ἀνθρωποκτόνο] Omnis inquit 
homicida: scilicet non solum ille qui 
ferro verum et ille qui odio fratrem 
insequitur (Bede). 

¢ ai, ἐν αὐτῷ pév.] eternal life 
abiding in him. The addition of 
the last words brings out the thought 
that ‘eternal life’ must (under the 
circumstances of our present life) be 
a continuous power, and a communi- 
cated gift (comp. John vi. 53). 

The whole phrase is unique. Else- 
where ‘the word’ (ii. 14; John v. 38; 
comp. xv. 7), the ‘unction’ (ii. 27), ‘the 
seed of God’ (iii. 9), ‘the love of God’ 
(iii. 17), ‘the truth’ (2 John 2), are 
said to ‘abide’ in the believer; and so 
also God (v. 24, iv. 12, 13, 15 f.) and 
Christ (John vi. 56, xv. 5). Even to 
the last man has not ‘life in himself,’ 
This is the divine prerogative alone. 


2. The manifestation of love (vv. 
16—18). 


It has been shewn that love is the 
sign of the Christian life. It is now 
shewn that love must be fashioned 
after the pattern of Christ who made 
it known in sacrifice (σ. 16). Such 
love extends to the common inter- 
course of life (Ὁ. 17); and must be at 
once active and real (v. 18). 

6 In this we know love, because he 
laid down his life for us; and we 
ought to lay down our lives for the 
brethren. τῇ But whosoever has the 
world’s goods, and beholdeth his 
brother in need, and shutteth up his 
heart from him, how abideth the love 
of God in him? * Little children, 


8 


114 


σαν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[III. 16, 17 


16? , 2 f ‘ ᾽ , of 
Ev τούτῳ ἐγνωκαμεν τὴν ἀγαπην; OTL 


΄σ ~ ‘ A ΄σ Wf Ἢ Ἅ € ΄- 
ἐκεῖνος ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ ἔθηκεν καὶ ἡμεῖς 


ὀφείλομεν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀδελφῶν τὰς ψυχὰς θεῖναι. 


17 ὃς 


΄ ΄σ \ ? § 
δ᾽ ἂν ἔχη τὸν βίον τοῦ κόσμου καὶ θεωρῇ Tov ἀδελφὸν 
‘ 


16 τὴν dy.+7od θεοῦ vg. 


let us not love in word, neither with 
the tongue, but in deed and truth. 

16. Ἔν τούτῳ] In this, see c. ti. 3 
note. The truth which has been 
enunciated, the self-sacrificing charac- 
ter of love, as opposed to the murder- 
ous character of hatred, opens the way 
to the most complete revelation of love. 
The ‘this’ as elsewhere, looks both 
backwards and forwards. 

ἐγνώκαμεν] cognovimus V., cognosct- 
mus Aug., we know as the result of 
divine teaching: we have learnt and 
now hold the lesson for ever. This 
knowledge of experience is contrasted 
with the knowledge of intuition (οἴ- 
dare) in v.15. Comp. John xv. 13. 

τὴν ἀγάπην] See Additional Note. 

ἐκεῖνος] He, Christ. See ii. 6 note. 

τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ ἔθηκεν) animam 
suam posuit V., laid down His life. 
The phrase is peculiar to St John, 
John x. 11 (note), 15, 17 ff, xiii. 37 ff, 
XV. 13. 

This is the only passage in the 
Epistle in which St John uses ὑπέρ in 
behalf of (comp. 3 John 7). It occurs 
in the Gospel in similar connexions not 
unfrequently: vi. 51; X. 11, 15; xi. 50 
ff.; xiii. 37 ἢ; xv. 13; xvii. 19; xviii. 
14. Contrast περί ὁ. ii. 2; iv. 10. 

The image appears to be that of 
divesting oneself of a thing (John xiii. 
4). Compare ‘animam ponere,’ ‘de- 
ponere. 

καὶ ἡμεῖς ὀφείλομεν] and we ought... 
as a consequence of this knowledge; 
but St John regards the duty as in- 
cluded in the knowledge (and we 
ought) and not as logically deduced 
from it (wherefore we ought). Comp. 
v. 3. The obligation lies in the per- 
ception of the relation in which we 


θεῖναι NABC: τιθέναι S. 


stand to one another and to Christ. 
That which constrains us is not only 
His example, but the truth which 
that example reveals. Comp. 2. 7. 
For ὀφείλομεν see 11. 6 note. Ignatius 
speaking of himself in the spirit of 
this passage says to the Ephesians: 
ἀντίψυχον ὑμῶν ἐγώ (ad Eph. 21; 
comp. ad Smyrn. 10; ad Polyc. 2, 6). 
The words addressed by St John to 
the young Robber sound like an echo 
of it: ἂν δέῃ τὸν σὸν θάνατον ἑκὼν ὑπο- 
μενῶ, ὡς ὁ Κύριος τὸν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν᾽ ὑπὲρ 
σοῦ τὴν Ψψυχὴν ἀντιδώσω τὴν ἐμήν 
(Euseb. ZZ. Ε. iii. 23). 

17. St John turns from considering 
thegreatness of our obligation to notice 
the ordinary character of failure. By 
the transition he suggests that there 
isa danger in indulging ourselves in 
lofty views which lie out of the way of 
common experience. We may there- 
fore try ourselves by a far more home- 
ly test. The question is commonly 
not of dying for another but of com- 
municating to another the outward 
means of living. If we are found 
wanting here, we need look no further 
for judgment. 

ὃς δ᾽ ἂν ἔχῃ] Qui habuerit V. Comp. 
ii. 5 note. 

tov βίον τοῦ κόσμου] substantiam 
vite V., facultates mundi Aug., the 
life of the world, ‘the substance of 
the world,’ as contrasted with ‘life 
eternal’ (Ὁ. 15). Comp. Luke xv. 12 
(τὸν βίον); ii. 16 note. The phrase 
includes all the endowments which 
make up our earthly riches, wealth, 
station, intellect. It has been finely 
said of a great teacher that ‘he was 
tender to dulness as to all forms of 
poverty.’ 


IIT. 18] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


115 


᾽ = at A ‘ , ᾽ ian 
αὐτοῦ χρείαν ἔχοντα Kal κλείση τὰ σπλάγχνα αὐτοῦ 
: YX 

3 3 — wey > ‘ ΄σ “ / > : ἢ πὴ 
an αὐτοῦ, πῶς ἢ ἀγάπη τοῦ θεοῦ μένει ἐν αὐτῶ: 
᾽ 05 

18 7 \ ᾽ a / \ ΄σ ΄ ᾽ \ 
Texvia, μὴ ἀγαπῶμεν λόγῳ μηδὲ TH γλώσση ἀλλὰ 


18 τεκνία NABC (vg) syrhl: μου S syrvg me the (vg). 


πτῇ oN. 


θεωρῇ] behold as a spectacle on 
which he allows his eyes to rest. This 
is the only place where the verb oc- 
curs in St John’s Epistles; and else- 
where in the Epistles it is found only 
in Heb. vii. 4. Comp. Apoce. xi. 11 f. 
The word is common in the Gospel of 
St John and is always used with its 
full meaning. See John ii. 23 note. 

χρείαν ἔχοντα] necesse habere V., 
egere F., esurientem, egentem Aug. 
The rendering of the Vulgate is 
suggested by ii. 27. See note there 
for the absolute use of yp. ἔχειν. 

κλείσῃ τὰ σπλ.] clauserit viscera sua 
ab eo V., shuts up his heart from him 
80 that the destitute brother can find 
no access to his sympathy. The phrase 
‘to shut up the heart’ is apparently 
unique. It expresses the interposi- 
tion of a barrier between the sufferer 
and the tender feelings of his brother. 
Comp. Ps. Ixxvii. 10 (‘17 PDP συνέχειν 
Tous οἰκτιρμούς LXX.). Ta σπλάγχνα is 
found here only in the writings of St 
John (it occurs in St Luke and St 
Paul). 

mas...;] how doth...? The interro- 
gative construction is similar to that 
in Ὁ. 12. 

ἡ a. τοῦ 6.] caritas Dei V., dilectio 
Dei Aug., the love of God, the love of 
which God is at once the object and 
the author and the pattern. Comp. 
ii. 5 note. 

μένει] abide...as a continuous active 
power. Comp. Ὁ. 15. 

18. Texvia] Filioli V., Little chit- 
dren. The word of address is changed 
(v. 13). The father now pleads with 
those who draw their being from him. 

py... Ady μηδὲ τῇ γλ.] not...with 
word, neither with the tongue, in 
theory as opposed to action; with 


τῇ yk. ABC: 


mere outward expression as opposed 
to the genuine movement of our whole 
being. ; 

λόγῳ...ἐν ἔργῳ...] with word...in 
deed... The slight change of construc- 
tion marks the difference between the 
instrument and the sphere of the mani- 
festation of love. It must find scope 
in our true and full life. For ἐν ἔργῳ 
καὶ dd. compare John iv. 23 f. ἐν 
πνεύματι καὶ ἀληθείᾳ. 

‘If love depends on a word, when 
the word ceaseth the love ceaseth. 
Such was the love of Balak and Ba- 
laam’ (Jalkut Reub. 145. 4: Schoett- 
gen). The passagequoted from Aboth 
y. 22 is wholly different in sense. 


3. The fruit of love (ev. 19—24). 


As St John has spoken of the ne- 
cessity and of the pattern of love so 
now he goes on to speak of its fruit. 
The fruit of love is confidence. Such 
confidence stills the condemnation 
which the heart pronounces against 
the believer (vz. 19, 20). It finds 
its expression in prayers, which are 
necessarily answered, because they are 
the voice of obedient love (vv. 21—23). 
It issues in the fulness of sympathy 
(@. 24). 

τ In this we shall know that we 
are of the truth, and shall assure our 
heart before him, 59 whereinsoever 
our heart may condemn us; because 
God ts greater than our heart and 
knoweth all things. 2: Beloved, if our 
heart condemn us not, we have bold- 
ness towards God, and whatsoever 
we ask we receive from him, because 
we observe his commandments and 
do the things that are pleasing in his 
sight. 73 And this is his command- 
ment, that we should beliece the name 


8—2 


116 


> at ΄ 
ἐν ἔργῳ καὶ ἀληθείᾳ. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[III. 19, 20 


΄ 
Ev τούτῳ γνωσόμεθα 


4 ? “-“ a , 2 Ἵ ν oof 6 > “- Υ͂ 
ὅτι ἐκ τῆς ἀληθείας ἐσμέν, καὶ ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοῦ πεί- 

\ , con 20 “ 2\ , = 
σομεν THV καρδίαν ημων OTL εαν KATAYWWOKY μων 


ἐν ἔ. NABC: -- ἐν ς΄. 


γνωσόμεθα SABC me the: γινώσκομεν S vg syrr. 


x. NA**C vg me syrhl. 


of his Son Jesus Christ and love one 
another, even as he gave us command- 
ment. “4 And he that observeth his 
commandments abideth in him and 
hein him; and in this we know that 
he abideth in us, from the Spirit 
which he gave us. 

19. Ἔν τούτῳ] In this, the con- 
sciousness of active and sincere love 
of the brethren, resting upon and 
moulded by the love of Christ. 

γνωσόμεθα] cognoscemus V., weshall 
know, perceive. The future expresses 
the dependence of the knowledge upon 
the fulfilment of the specified condi- 
tion. Again it is to be noticed that 
the knowledge which comes through 
outward experience stands in contrast 
with the knowledge which belongs to 
the idea of faith v. 14 (οἴδαμεν). 

ἐκ τῆς ἀλ. ἐσμέν] cx veritate sumus 
V., are of the truth, draw the power 
of our being from the Truth as its 
source. Comp. ii. 16. Christ Himself 
is revealed as the Truth, in whom the 
right relations of man to man and to 
God and to the world are perfectly 
presented (comp. John xviii. 37). So 
far then as the Christian is like Him, 
he is ‘of the truth’ The conception 
of being ‘a child of the Truth’ is dif- 
ferent from that of being ‘a child 
of God, though practically the two 
are identical. In the latter case the 
thought is of the presence of the divine 
principle as divine: in the former, of 
the fulfilment of all the offices of man. 

καὶ ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοῦ...] and, as a 
consequence of the knowledge of our 
complete dependence upon the Truth, 
we shall assure our hearts before Him, 
ie. in the presence of God. The an- 
tecedent is supplied by the reader. 


19 ἐν τ. AB vg me syrhl: +xal’ ἐν τ, XC the syrvg. 


τὴν κι A*B the syrvg: ras 


The simple pronoun (αὐτός) naturally 
describes the one Sovereign Lord, 
just as the isolating and defining pro- 
noun (ἐκεῖνος) describes Christ. 

The phrase ‘before Him’ (in con- 
spectu ejus V., coram tpso Aug.) stands 
emphatically first in order to mark 
the essential character of the Christian 
life. Itis lived out in the very sight 
of God. The believer feels himself to 
be always before His eyes. In that 
Presence (comp. ii. 28), if not before, 
he comes to find what he is. Comp. 
2 Cor. v. 10 (φανερωθῆναι); 1 Thess. 
iii, 13. 

meloopev...d7Tt ἐὰν KaTAayWwoeoky...OTL 
peilov...mdvra]suademus (suadeamus, 
suadebimus) quoniam si reprehende- 
rit nos (male senserit Aug.) cor nos- 
trum major est Deus corde nostro et 
novit omnia V., (we) shall assure our 
heart before Him whereinsoever our 
heart condemn us, because God is 
greater than our heart and knoweth 
all things. The many conflicting in- 
terpretations of this passage spring 
out of the different translations of (1) 
the verb πείσομεν, and (2) the double 
conjunction or relative ὅτι (6 τι). 

1. Thus if we take the sense per- 
suade for the verb, there are two 
groups of renderings possible: the 
first (a) in which the clauses which 
follow give the substance of that of 
which we are satisfied; and the se- 
cond (8) in which this substance is 
supposed to be supplied by the reader. 

(a) In the first case there are two 
possible views: 

(a) The second ὅτι may be simply 
resumptive: We shall persuade our 
heart, that, if our heart condemn us, 
that, I say, God ἐξ greater... 


III. 20] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


117 


€ OL 4 7 3 \ € ἐν ~ va € cael 
ἢ καρδία, ὅτι μείζων ἐστὶν ὁ θεὸς τῆς καρδίας ἡμῶν 


20 ὅτι μ. NBC syrvg: om. ὅτε A vg me the. 


(δ) Or the first ὅτι may be taken as 
the relative: We shall persuade our 
heart, whereinsoever our heart con- 
demn us, that God ts greater... 

Against both these interpretations 
it may be urged, as it seems, with de- 
cisive force, that the conclusion is not 
one which flows naturally from the 
premiss. The consciousness of a sin- 
cere love of the brethren does not 
furnish the basis of the conviction of 
the sovereign greatness of God. 

(8) If the substance of that of which 
we shall be persuaded is mentally sup- 
plied, as, ‘that we are of the truth, 
or ‘that our prayers are heard,’ there 
are again two possible interpretations: 

(a) The second ὅτι may be taken as 
resumptive in the sense because: we 
shall persuade our heart, because if 
our heart condemn us, because I say 
God is greater... 

(δὴ) Or again the first ὅτε may be 
taken as the relative: we shall per- 
suade our heart whereinsoever our 
heart condemn us, because God is 
greater... 

It appears to be a fatal objection to 
both these views that just that has to 
be supplied which the sense given to 
the verb leads the reader to expect to 
be clearly expressed. And further it 
may be remarked that while the use 
of a resumptive ὅτι is quite intelligible 
after the introduction of a consider- 
able clause it is very unnatural after 
the insertion of a few-words. 

2. If on the other hand the verb 
be taken in the sense ‘we shall assure,’ 
‘we shall still and tranquillise the 
fears and misgivings of our heart,’ 
there are yet two modes of completing 
the sentence: 

(a) The second ὅτε may be taken as 
resumptive in the sense of because: 
we shall assure our hearts, because if 
our heart condemn us, because, I say, 


κύριος (for θεός) C. 


God is greater. Such a resumptive 
use of the particle has however been 
shewn to be very harsh. 

(8) There remains then the adop- 
tion of the first ὅτι as the relative: 
We shall assure our heart, wherein- 
soever our heart condemn us, because 
God is greater... 

This sense falls in completely with 
the context and flows naturally from 
the Greek. 

But an ambiguity still remains. In 
what sense is the superior greatness 
of God to be understood? Is it the 
ground of our exceeding need? or of 
our sure confidence? Both interpre- 
tations can be drawn from the words. 
(1) We shall then, and then only, still 
our heart, in whatsoever it may con- 
demn us, because we know that the 
judgment of God must be severer than 
our own judgment, and so apart from 
fellowship with Him we can have no 
hope. Or (2) We shall then still our 
heart in whatsoever it may condemn 
us, because we are in fellowship with 
God, and that fact assures us of His 
sovereign mercy. The latter sense 
seems to be required by the whole 
context. See below. 

πείσομεν] The nearest parallel in 
the N. T. to the sense of the word 
which has been adopted here is Matt. 
xxviii. 14. Comp. 2 Mace. iv. 45. 

τὴν καρδίαν] our heart, the seat of 
the moral character. It occurs only 
in this passage in the Epistles of St 
John. Comp. Rom. ii. 15; Eph. i. 18. 

The singular (which St John always 
uses in the Gospel and Epistle) fixes 
the thought upon the personal trial in 
each case. See Additional Note. 

20. ὅτι ἐάν] whereinsoever. The 
words balance the ‘all things’ which 
follows. The form ὅτι ἐάν does not 
occur as the true text elsewhere in 
N. Τὶ (Col. iii. 23 ὁ ἐάν), but always 


118 


, , 
καὶ γινώσκει παντα. 


, af \ \ ΄ 
καταγινώσκῃ; παρρήσιαν εχοόμεν σρος τον θεόν, 


21 ἀγαπητοί: ἀδελφοί δὰ. 


μὴ κατ. ΒΟ: -- ἡμῶν SNA vg me the syrr. 


ὅτι ἄν (John ii. 5, xiv. 13, xv. 16). This 
however does not appear to be a deci- 
sive objection. In Jolin ii. 5, xv. 16 
ἐάν is an early variant (SA). 

καταγινώσκῃ] reprehenderit V., 
male senserit Aug., condemn. The 
word is used of the internal judgment 
of conscience (Hcclus. xiv. 2) as dis- 
tinguished from the formal sentence 
of the judge (κατακρίνω). 

Comp. Gal. ii. 11. 

μείζων ἐ. ὁ 6. τῆς x. ἡ.) major est 
Deus corde nostro V., God ts greater 
than our heart, justly able to sway 
and control it. He is the Supreme 
Sovereign over the whole man. No- 
thing in man can stand against His 
judgment and will. The context re- 
quires that this sovereignty should be 
regarded under the aspect of love, as 
exercised for the calming of human 
doubts. The supposition that ‘greater’ 
means more searching and authorita- 
tive in condemnation than the heart 
is at variance with the tenor of the 
passage and also with the natural sense 
of ‘greater.’ 

γινώσκει π.}] novit omnia V., know- 
eth all things, watches (to use human 
language) the course and spring of 
action (John ii. 25 note), not only this 
failure and that on which the heart 
dwells, but these and all else, and 
with this knowledge offers us His 
love and assures us of it. 

Thus the meaning of the whole 
passage will be: The sense within us 
of a sincere love of the brethren, which 
is the sign of God’s presence with us, 
will enable us to stay the accusations 
of our conscience, whatever they may 
be, because God, who gives us the 
love, and so blesses us with His fellow- 
ship, is greater than our heart; and 
He, having perfect knowledge, for- 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[Π1.. 21, 22 


x’ Ayanntol, ἐὰν 7 καρδία μὴ 


\ 
35 και 


ἡ κι AB (lat): -τ ἡμῶν SNC vg syrr me the. 


ἔχομεν: ἔχει B. 


gives all on which the heart sadly 
dwells. 

21. ᾿Αγαπητοῇ Carissimi V., Dilec- 
tissimi Aug. Comp.c.ii.7 note. The 
tender address follows naturally from 
the thought of the fears and hopes of 
Christians. The sense of misgiving 
(the condemnation of the heart) and 
the sense of duty done (the acquittal 
of the heart) severally involve special 
applications of the divine revelation. 
In the one case this revelation brings 
assurance, and in the other effectual 
prayer. ὁ : 

ἐὰν ἡ καρδία μὴ καταγ. | si cor nostrum 
non reprehenderit V. (male senserit 
Aug.), if our heart condemn us not. 
This evidently is the converse case to 
‘Uf our heart condemn us. It does 
not imply a claim to sinlessness, nor 
yet an insensibility to the heinousness 
of sin, but the action of a lively faith 
which retains a real sense of fellow- 
ship with God, and this carries with it 
confidence and peace. 

The change in the order of the 
words in the parallel clauses marks 
a change of emphasis. In the first 
clause stress is laid on the fact of 
condemnation (ὅτι ἐὰν καταγινώσκῃ ἣ 
καρδία): in the second on the moral 
faculty which pronounces no con- 
demnation (ἐὰν ἡ καρδία μὴ καταγ.). 

παρρησίαν ἔχομεν] fiduciam ha- 
bemus V., we have boldness, so as 
to express without reserve all our 
wants. Compare c. v. 14 (ii. 28, iv. 
17); Jobn vii. 4 note. The thought 
here is of the boldness with which the 
son appears before the Father, and 
not of that with which the accused 
appears before the Judge. 

πρὸς τ. 6.) ad Deum V., towards 
God. Compare Actsxxiv. 16; Rom.iv. 
2 (πρὸς 6.), ν. τ; 2 Cor. iii. 4; Phil. iv. 6. 


111. 23] THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 119 


A ON ? “ , “ 4 
ὃ av αἰτώμεν λαμβάνομεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, ὅτι Tas ἐντολὰς 
Σ a ~ \ \ \ δ᾽ ΄- ΄ 
αὐτοῦ τηροῦμεν καὶ τὰ ἀρεστὰ ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ ποιοῦμεν. 
Α « > A \ a ry na 
δ καὶ αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἐντολὴ αὐτοῦ, iva πιστεύσωμεν TH 


22 αἰτώμεθα N. Comp. v. 14 f. 


fusion c. iv. 17 (8) 13: accipiemus vg the syrhl. 
23 πιστεύσωμεν SB: πιστεύωμεν NAC, 


τηρῶμεν NA, 


λαμβάνωμεν A: comp. for similar con- 
ἀπ᾽ at. SABC: παρ᾽ αὐ. ς. 
τῷ dv. τοῦ vl. αὐ. 


Ἶ. X. NBC vg me the syrr: τῷ dv. ad. Ἶ. Χριστῷ A (all. τῷ υἱῷ av. Ἶ. X.). 


22. καὶ 6 ἂν αἰτῶμεν] et gquodcunque 
petierimus V., and whatsoever we 
ask... The expression of our wants is 
followed by the satisfying of them. 
The words describe the actual present 
experience of the believer (airapev) 
and the assertion is absolute. Every 
prayer is granted. But Augustine 
rightly adds: Discernamus exaudi- 
tiones Dei. Invenimus enim quosdam 
non exauditos ad voluntatem exau- 
ditos ad salutem; et rursus quosdam 
invenimus exauditos ad voluntatem 
et non exauditos ad salutem. 

Here the thought is of the actual 
perception of the gift by the believer 
in time (λαμβάνομεν): in St Mark xi. 
24 (ἔλάβετε) the thought is of the 
divine response in the eternal order. 
For λαμβ. ἀπό see 6. ii. 27 note. 

ὅτι.. «τηροῦμεν] because we observe... 
Obedience is not alleged as the ground 
but as.the assurance of the fulfilment. 
The answer to prayer is given not as 
a reward for meritorious action, but 
because the prayer itself rightly un- 
derstood coincides with God’s will 
(comp. John viii. 29, xi. 42). The sole 
object of the believer is to do thorough- 
ly the part which has been assigned 
to him: his petitions are directed to 
this end and so are necessarily granted. 
Comp. John xv. 7. 

τηροῦμεν.. «ποιοῦμεν] keep...do...The 
eyes of the believer are turned watch- 
fully to discern (τηροῦμεν) the will of 
God for the future, and at the present 
he is engaged in executing that which 
is pleasing to Him. Under this two- 
fold aspect right action is presented 
both as a work of obedience and asa 


work of freedom, as enjoined and also 
as spontaneous. 

For the sense of τηρεῖν see John 
xvii. 12 note, and for τηρεῖν τ. evr. 6. 
ii. 3 note. Tnpeiv and ποιεῖν occur 
again together in v. 2. 3. 

τὰ ἀρεστά) ea gue sunt placita V., 
the things that are pleasing...not 
simply ‘things pleasing,’ but definitely 
those which correspond with our po- 
sition and duty. 

Compare John viii. 29. 

ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ] coram eo V., in His 
sight. Comp. Hebr. xiii. 21; Acts iv. 
19; 1 Pet. iii. 4; 1 Tim. ii. 3; ν. 4. 
But we find ἀρεστὰ αὐτῷ John viii. 29. 

The slight shade of difference be- 
tween ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοῦ (v. 19) and ἐνώ- 
πίον αὐτοῦ seems to be expressed by 
the phrases ‘in His presence’ and ‘in 
His sight.’ The latter phrase ac- 
centuates the thought of the Divine 
regard. Comp. John sii. 37 (ἔμπ. av.) 
and xx. 30 (ἐνώπ. τ. μ.). 

23. καὶ αὕτη é. ἡ evr. av.) And this 
ts his commandment. The ‘things 
that are pleasing,’ the many ‘com- 
mandments’ are summed up in one 
commandment, which includes faith 
and practice, the power of action and 
the form of action, faith and love. 
Comp. ii. 4 f.; 2 John 6. 

ἡ ἐντολή... .ἵνα...7 Comp. John xiii. 
34, XV. 12, 17. 

ἵνα πιστεύσωμεν... that we believe 
...Faith also is a work, John vi. 29, 
and therefore the proper object of 
command; and it may be regarded 
either as unceasingly continuous and 
progressive (πιστεύωμεν) OY as exer- 
cised at a critical moment when the 


120 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[III. 23 


οὐ σῦς τα 2 & Bos e 
ὀνόματι τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ ἀγαπώμεν 


whole tenor of life is determined 
(πιστεύσωμεν). This is the first place 
in the Epistle in which the exercise 
of faith is mentioned. Afterwards 
πιστεύω occurs not unfrequently. 

On the whole the reading πιστεύ- 
σωμεν is the more likely here. In this 
case the decisive act of faith is treated 
as the foundation of the abiding work 
of love; at the same time the pre- 
sent πιστεύωμεν gives an excellent 
sense, faith and love being presented 
as simultaneous in their present de- 
velopment. 

The tenses of the verb (πιστεύω) ap- 
pear to be used with significant ex- 
actness by St John; and the instances 
of the occurrence of the different 
forms will repay examination. 


1 Present: the immediate, con- 

tinuous exercise of faith: 

John x. 38 (dat.), vi. 29, xvi. 9 (εἰς), 
XX. 31 (ὅτι), iv. 42, x. 25 f,, xii. 39 
(xix. 35), XX. 31 (abs.). 

imper.: John iy. 21, x. 37, xiv. 11; 
1 John iv. 1 (dat.); John xii. 36, 
xiv. I (εἰς). 

partic. (ὁ πιστεύων, of πιστεύοντες): 
John vy. 24; 1 John v. τὸ (dat.); 
John iii. 16, 18, 36, vi. 35, 40, 47, 
vii. 38 ἢ, xi. 25 f., xii. 44, 46, xiv. 
2, xvii. 20; 1 John v. 10, 13 (eis), 
1 John v. 1, 5 (ὅτι); John iii. 15, 
vi. 64 (abs.). 


2 Imperfect: the continuous exer- 
cise of faith in the past: 
John y. 46 (dat.), vii. 5, xii. 11, 37 
(els). 
3 Aorist: the definite, decisive act 
of faith: 
John 11. 22, iv. 50, vi. 30, x. 38; 1 
John iii. 23 (dat.); John ii. 11, 23, 
iv. 39, vii. 31, 48, viii. 30, ix. 36, 
ΣΧ. 42, xi. 45, xii. 42 (εἰς); John 
viii. 24, ix. 18, xi. 42, xiii. 19, xvii. 
8, 21 (ὅτι); John 1. 7, iv. 4, 53, v. 
44, Xi. 15, 40, xiv. 29 (abs.). 


partic.: John xx. 29 (abs.). 

4 Perfect: the past exercise of faith 
continued into the present: 

John viii. 31 (dat.); Jobn iii. 18, 1 

John v. ro (εἰς); John vi. 69, xi. 
27, Xvi. 27 (ὅτι); John xx. 29; I 
John iv. 16 (?) (abs.). 

The differences come out clearly 
where different tenses stand in close 
connexion; 6.5. John vi. 29 f, vii. 5, 31, 
xii. 37, 42; 1 John v. Io. 

Tor. τῳ ὀνόματι] believe the name... 
The phrase is remarkable. It is equi- 
valent to ‘believe as true the message 
which the name conveys. The full 
title, His Son Jesus Christ (c. i. 3 
note), is a compressed Creed. Con- 
trast ‘believe in the name’ v.13; John 
i, 12, ii. 23, iii. 18. Comp. v. 10. The 
translation of A. V. probably comes 
from the Vulgate which gives cre- 
damus in nomine, the rendering else- 
where of πιστεύειν εἰς τὸ ὄνομα (John 
i. 12, ii, 23, iii. 18). See Additional 
Note on the names of Christ in this 
Epistle. 

ἀγαπῶμεν ἀλλ.] diligamus alteru- 
trum V., love one another: ὃ. 11 note, 
iv. 7, 11, 12; 2 John 5; John siii. 
34 (ἐντολὴν καινὴν δίδωμι); XV. 12, 17. 
The exact words are used (contrast z. 
14) in which Christ Himself gave the 
commandment on the eve of His Pas- 
sion, when He fulfilled the ideal of 
love. The subject to ἔδωκεν is sup- 
plied naturally from the preceding 
clause. 

Compare Rom. xiii. το. 

Multum facit qui multum diligit... 
Bene facit qui communitati magis 
quam suze voluntati servit (Thom. a 
Kempis, De Jmit. 1. 15, 2). 

24. The obedience, which is the 
rule of the Christian life, issues in 
abiding fellowship with God. This 
verse is closely connected with Ὁ. 22, 
while Ὁ. 23 is in thought parenthe- 
tical. 


TIL. 24] 


ἀλλήλους, καθὼς ἔδωκεν ἐντολὴν ἡμῖν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


121 


24 Mos a 
καὶ ὁ τηρῶν 


Ἂ 2 \ 2 a 3 2 fot t \ > \ 2 ᾽ =~ 
Tas ἐντολας αὐτοῦ ἐν auTW μένει καὶ AUTOS EV auTwW. 
\ κα , , ef , 2 con 3 - , 
και εν TOUTW γινώσκομεν OTL MEVEL EV ἥμιν, EK TOU πνευ- 


ce - ot 
ματος οὗ ἡμῖν ἔδωκεν. 


ἡμῖν SABO vg me the syrr: om. ς΄. 


24 καὶ ἐν τι: om. καί &* the. οὗ 


ty. ἔδ. ABC (lat): οὗ ἔδ. qu. δὲ vg me the syrr. 


καὶ ὁ τηρῶν...] And he that obser- 
veth... These words take up ὅτι τὰς 
ἐντολὰς αὐτοῦ Typ. in Ὁ. 22, so that the 
reference is to ‘the commandments of 
God,’ and not directly to the one com- 
mandment of Christ Ὁ. 23. Our prayers 
are granted because they spring out 
of that spirit which strives after per- 
fect sympathy; and, more than this, 
our obedience is the pledge of a per- 
sonal fellowship. 

ἐν αὐτῷ μένει...] ie. in God. See 
c. iv. 15 note. 

Bede says with singular force: Sit 
ergo tibi domus Deus et esto domus 
Dei: mane in Deo, et maneat in te 
Deus. 

ἐν τούτῳ γινώσκομεν) in this we 
know, perceive... The love which the 
Christian feels, and which is the spring 
of his obedience, assures him of God’s 
fellowship with him. In other words, 


God has given him of His Spirit. 
The use of the two prepositions ‘in 
(ev) this, ‘from (ἐκ) the Spirit,’ shews 
that the two clauses are not in ap- 
position. Τινώσκομεν is repeated in 
thought before ἐκ τοῦ m». ©. iv. 6. 

ἐκ tov πνεύματος) This is the first 
mention of the Spirit in the Epistle. 
Afterwards the references are not un- 
frequent. It is remarkable that the 
Name never occurs with the epithet 
‘Holy’ in the Epistles or Apocalypse 
of St John. 

ov...edaxev] which he gave when 
we became Christians. Comp. c. iv. 13; 
John xiv. 16; Acts v. 32, viii. 18, xv. 
8; 2 Cor.i.2rf. 

Augustine draws a striking conclu- 
sion from the truth that the Spirit of 
God is the source of man’s life: Con- 
temne te cum laudaris. 1116 in te 
laudetur qui per te operatur. 


122 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Additional Note on iii. 1. Children of God. 


The three St John uses several phrases to describe the relation of believers to 
phrases by God which require to be carefully considered in connexion with the contexts 
which St jin which they occur. 
Die ἄρον The initial fact of the communication of the divine life is expressed by 
new life. γεννηθῆναι ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ (i). The essential connexion existing in virtue of this 
quickening is expressed by εἶναι ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ (ii). In virtue of this connexion 
the believer becomes and is a τέκνον θεοῦ (iii). 
i. ‘To be i. (1) The phrase γεννηθῆναι ἐκ «. 6. is used commonly in the perfect 
born (be- (γεγέννηται, γεγεννημένος) ; that is, the initial fact of the new life is regarded 
gotten) of in its abiding power. 
. va the This communicated life is 
Perfect, (a) shewn by certain signs, faith in Jesus as the Christ, righteousness 
and love: 
1 John v. I πᾶς ὁπιστεύων ὅτι Ἰησοῦς ἐστὶν ὃ χριστὸς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ γεγέννηται. 
— ii. 29 πᾶς ὁ ποιῶν τὴν δικαιοσύνην ἐξ αὐτοῦ γεγέννηται. 
— iv. 7 πᾶς ὁ ἀγαπῶν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ γεγέννηται. 
and 
(8) carries with it certain consequences, freedom from sin and victory : 
1 John iii. 9 πᾶς ὁ γεγεννημένος ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἁμαρτίαν οὐ ποιεῖ ὅτι σπέρμα 
αὐτοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ μένει. 
-- οὐ δύναται ἁμαρτάνειν ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ γεγέννηται. 
— v.18 πᾶς ὁ γεγεννημένος ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐχ ἁμαρτάνει. 
ae “ἡ πᾶν τὸ γεγεννημένον ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ νικᾷ τὸν κόσμον. 
Compare 
John iii, 6 τὸ γεγεννημένον ἐκ τοῦ πνεύματος. 
-- 8 ὁ γεγεννημένος ἐκ τοῦ πνεύματος. 
(2) in the (2) The fact of the communication of the divine life is specially noticed : 
Aorist. John i, 12 f. ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ἐξουσίαν τέκνα θεοῦ γενέσθαι....οἵ...ἐκ θεοῦ ἐγεν- 
νήθησαν. 
Compare 
1 John v. 18 ὁ γεννηθεὶς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ. 
-- πᾶς ὁ ἀγαπῶν τὸν γεννήσαντα.... 
Compare also 
John ili. 3 (7) ἐὰν μή τις γεννηθῇ ἄνωθεν. 
-- 5 ἐὰν μή τις γεννηθῇ ἐξ ὕδατος καὶ πνεύματος. 
The aorist and perfect occur together 1 John v. 18; John iii. 5—8. 
See also Gal. iv. 23, 29. : 
The form of expression is not found in any of the other writers of the 
N.T. Yet compare St Paul’s use of γεννᾷν 1 Cor. iv. 15; Philem. Io; and 
St Peter’s use of ἀναγεννᾷν, 1 Pet. i. 3, 23. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 123 


ii, The phrase εἶναι ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ is connected with a considerable group ii. ‘To be 
of similar phrases, εἶναι ἐκ τοῦ διαβόλου (6. iii, 8), ἐκ τοῦ πονηροῦ (iii. 12), ἐκ OF God, 
τοῦ κόσμου (ii. 16, note), ἐκ τῆς ἀληθείας (ii. 21, note), ἐκ τῆς γῆς (John iii 
31, note), ἐκ τῶν κάτω, ἐκ τῶν ἄνω (viii 23). It expresses the ideas of 
derivation and dependence, and so of a moral correspondence between the 
issue and the source. 

(1) The characteristics of him who is thus vitally dependent upon God (1) signs 
(1 John v. 19, iv. 4, 6) are expressed both in a positive and in a negative ἢ ™°2: 
form. 

(a) positively : 

3 John 11 ὁ ἀγαθοποιῶν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν. 

John viii. 47 ὁ ὧν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ τὰ ῥήματα τοῦ θεοῦ ἀκούει. 

(β) negatively : 

1 John iii. 10 was ὁ μὴ ποιῶν δικαιοσύνην οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ. 

— ἵν. 6 ὃς οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ ἀκούει ἡμῶν. 

(2) And corresponding declarations are made with regard to spirits (2) signs 
(1 John iv. 1): in spirits. 

1 John iv. 2 πᾶν πνεῦμα ὃ ὁμολογεῖ Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα ἐκ 

τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν. 
= 3 πᾶν πνεῦμα ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ τὸν Ἰησοῦν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ ἔστιν. 

Compare 

1 John iv. 7 ἡ ἀγάπη ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν. 

John vii. 17... περὶ τῆς διδαχῆς πότερον ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν... 

1 John ii. 16 πᾶν τὸ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ... οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ πατρός... 

The nearest parallels in other writings of the N.T. are: 

Acts v. 38 ἢ, εἰ ἐκ θεοῦ ἐστίν. 

1 Cor. i. 30 ἐξ αὐτοῦ [τοῦ θεοῦ] ὑμεῖς ἐστὲ ἐν Χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ. 

— Xi 12 τὰ δὲ πάντα ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ. 

iii, The familiar title τέκνον θεοῦ, which describes the relation established iii. ‘Child 
by the new life, is of rarer occurrence in St John’s writings. Ὁ Ὁδᾶ. 

(1) The power of duly becoming a ‘child of God’ is given by the (1) ΤΙΘ΄ 


communication of the divine life. heginaing. 
John i. 12 ἢ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ἐξουσίαν τέκνα θεοῦ γενέσθαι, τοῖς πιστεύουσιν 
εἰς τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ, οἷ... ἐκ θεοῦ ἐγεννήθησαν. 
(2) The position is realised through the gift of love. (2) The 
1 John iii. 1...d-yamnv δέδωκεν ἡμῖν ὁ πατὴρ ἵνα τέκνα θεοῦ κληθώμεν... oe 


-- 2 νῦν τέκνα θεοῦ ἐσμέν. 

(3) Thus ‘the children of God’ form a distinct body marked by right- (3) The 
eousness and love. BIBURs 

1 John iii. 10 ἐν τούτῳ φανερά ἐστιν τὰ τέκνα τοῦ θεοῦ... 

Comp. c. v. 2; John xi. 52. 

The idea of τέκνον as it is thus presented by St John includes the two The idea 
notions of the presence of the divine principle and the action of human oo 
growth. The child is made to share in his Father’s nature (comp. 2 Pet. i. 

4), and he uses in progressive advance the powers which he has received. 


124 


distinct 
from that 
of ‘sons.’ 


Different 
aspects of 
the Incar- 
nation. 


1. ΜΊΒΒΙΟΝ. 


(a) The 
use of 
πέμπω. 


i, ὁ πέμ- 
ψας με. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


This thought of progress will be traced through the whole picture which 
St John draws of the spiritual life. ‘From strength to strength’ is the 
law by which it is shaped. ‘ 

It is therefore easily intelligible why St John never uses the title vids, 
the name of definite dignity and privilege, to describe the relation of 
Christians to God. He regards their position not as the result of an 
‘adoption’ (υἱοθεσία), but as the result of a new life which advances from 
the vital germ to full maturity. 


Additional Note on ili. 5. Aspects of the Incarnation. 


The phrases which St John uses to describe the Incarnation fall into 
different groups corresponding with different aspects of the Fact. In 
regard to the Father, it is a ‘Sending,’ a ‘Mission’ (1). In regard to the 
Son, it is a ‘Coming’ (2). In regard to the form, it is in ‘Flesh’ (3). In 
regard to men, it is a ‘Manifestation’ (4). 

1. The idea of the Mission of Christ, the Son, by the Father is ex- 
pressed by two verbs, πέμπω, ἀποστέλλω. The former describes the simple 
relation of the Sent to the Sender: the last adds ‘the accessory notions of 
a special commission and so far of a delegated authority in the person sent.’ 

Πέμπω is not found in this connexion in the Epistles of St John (comp. 
Rom. viii. 3 only); and it is used in the Gospel only by the Lord in the 
participial form in three phrases ὁ πέμψας pe (αὐτόν), ὁ πέμψας pe πατήρ, 
ὃ πατὴρ ὁ πέμψας pe. 

Of these phrases the simple ὁ πέμψας με is by far the most common. 
It is used in two connexions to express (a) some relation of Christ to Him 
Who sent Him, and (8) some relation of men to Christ as so sent. 

(a) John iv. 34 ἐμὸν βρῶμα.. (ἵνα ποιήσω τὸ θέλημα τοῦ π. μ. 

— V. 30 ζητῶώ.. τὸ θέλημα τοῦ π. μ᾿ 
— Vi. 38 καταβέβηκα.. «ἵνα ποιῶ... τὸ θέλημα τοῦ Tr. μ. 
39 τοῦτό ἐστιν τὸ θέλημα τοῦ π. μ. ἵνα...μὴ ἀπολέσω... 
— Vil. τό ἡ ἐμὴ διδαχή...ἐστίν.. τοῦ π. μ. 
26 ὁ π. μ. ἀληθής ἐστιν κἀγὼ ἃ ἤκουσα.. λαλῶ. 
— ix. 4 δεῖ ἐργάζεσθαι τὰ ἔργα τοῦ π. μ. 
— Vili. 29 ὁ π᾿ μ. μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ ἐστίν. 
— Vii. 33, xvi. 5 ὑπάγω πρὸς τὸν π. μ. 
Comp. vii. 18 ὁ ζητῶν τὴν δόξαν τοῦ π. αὐτὸν ἀληθής ἐστιν. 
(8) John ν. 24 ὁ.. πιστεύων τῷ π. μ. 
— Σἰϊ. 44 ὁ πιστεύων εἰς ἐμέ.. πιστεύει... εἰς τὸν π. μ. 
-- 45 ὁ θεωρῶν ἐμὲ θεωρεῖ τὸν π. μ. 
— xiii 20 ὁ ἐμὲ λαμβάνων λαμβάνει τὸν π. μ. 
— XV. 21 ταῦτα ποιήσουσιν διὰ τὸ ὄνομά μου ὅτι οὐκ οἴδασιν 
τὸν TT. μ. 
Comp. vii. 28 ἔστιν ἀληθινὸς ὁ π΄. μ. ὃν ὑμεῖς οὐκ οἴδατε. 


. THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 125 


The phrase ὁ πέμψας pe πατήρ adds to the notion of ‘sending’ that of ii. ὁ πέμ- 
the essential relation which gives authority to the mission. yas με πα- 
John v. 37 ὁπ. μ- π. ἐκεῖνος μεμαρτύρηκεν. we 

— [vili, 16 (doubtful reading: comp. viii, 29) μόνος οὐκ εἰμί, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐγὼ καὶ om. μ. 1.) 
viii. 18 μαρτυρεῖ περὶ ἐμοῦ ὁ π. μ. π. 
Xl. 49 6 π. μ. π-....ἐντολὴν δέδωκεν τί εἴπω... 
Xv. 24 6 λόγος ὃν ἀκούετε... ἐστίν... τοῦ π. μ. π. 

In the phrase ὁ πατὴρ ὁ πέμψας με the two notions of natural authority iii. ὁ πατὴρ 

and mission are dwelt on separately. It occurs ὁ πέμψας 


John vi. 44 ἐὰν μὴ ὁ π. ὁ π. μ. ἑλκύσῃ αὐτόν. oe 

Comp. V. 23 ὁ μὴ τιμῶν τὸν υἱὸν οὐ τιμᾷ τὸν π. τ. π. αὐτόν. 

The use οὗ ἀποστέλλω differs from that of πέμπω by the fact that in St (b) The 
John (yet see Matt. x. 40; Mark ix. 37; Luke ix. 48, x. 16) it is found only use of 
in the finite forms, ἀπέστειλα, ἀπέσταλκα. oo 

The aorist is by far the most common tense. This is used to Seiciba? i, hese 
the fact of the specific Mission in some particular aspect: 

John iii. 17 ἀπέστειλεν 6 θεὸς τὸν υἱὸν εἰς τὸν κόσμον...ἵνα σωθῇ ὁ κόσμος 

δέ αὐτοῦ. 
X. 36 ὃν 6 πατὴρ ἡγίασεν καὶ ἀπέστειλεν εἰς τὸν κόσμον. 
1 John iv. 10 [ὁ θεὸς] ἀπέστειλεν τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ ἱλασμὸν περὶ τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν 
ἡμῶν. 


Compare 
John vi. 57 καθὼς ἀπέστειλέν pe ὁ ζῶν πατήρ... 
— xvii. 18 καθὼς ἐμὲ ἀπέστειλας εἰς τὸν κόσμον... 
Vii. 29 wap’ αὐτοῦ εἰμὶ κἀκεῖνός με ἀπέστειλεν. 
Vili. 42 οὐδὲ ἀπ᾿ ἐμαυτοῦ ἐλήλυθα GAN’ ἐκεῖνός με ἀπέστειλεν. 
And this Mission is presented as the object (a) of recognition (know- 
ledge), or (8) of faith: 
(a) John xvii. 3 ἵνα γινώσκωσιν...ὃν ἀπέστειλας ᾿Ιησοῦν Χριστόν. 
-- 23 ἵνα γινώσκῃ ὁ κόσμος ὅτι σύ με ἀπέστειλας. 
-- 25 οὗτοι ἔγνωσαν ὅτι σύ με ἀπέστειλας. 


(β) John v. 38 ὅτι ὃν ἀπέστειλεν ἐκεῖνος τούτῳ ὑμεῖς οὐ πιστεύετε. 
. “ an a 
— vi. 29 τὸ ἔργον τοῦ θεοῦ iva πιστεύητε εἰς ov ἀπέστειλεν 
ἐκεῖνος. 
= “ , 4 iA > , 
— XL 42 wa πιστεύσωσιν OTL συ με ἀπέστειλας. 
— xvii. 21 ἵνα ὁ κόσμος πιστεύῃ ὅτι σύ με ἀπέστειλας. 
τὸς Η ΒΡ Ἐ ἢ 
Comp. John iii. 34 ...«ἐσφράγισεν ὅτι.. ὃν γὰρ ἀπέστειλεν ὁ θεός... 


The perfect, which occurs but rarely, describes the Mission in its 11. Perfect. 
abiding continuance: 


John v. 36 τὰ ἔργα ἃ ποιῶ μαρτυρεῖ...ὅτι ὁ πατήρ με ἀπέσταλκεν. 
1 John iv. 9 τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ τὸν μονογενῆ ἀπέσταλκεν ὁ θεὸς εἰς τον κόσμον 
ἵνα ζήσωμεν Se αὐτοῦ. 
; ἢ Banus wee ΓΟ ΤῊΝ erst 
-- 14 τεθεάμεθα καὶ μαρτυροῦμεν ὅτι ὁ πατὴρ ἀπέσταλκεν τὸν υἱὸν 
σωτῆρα τοῦ κόσμου. 
aes 
John xx. 21 καθὼς ἀπέσταλκέν pe ὃ πατήρ, κἀγὼ πέμπω ὑμᾶς. 


126 


2. ComING. 


(a) Aor. 
ἦλθον. 


ἐξῆλθον. 


(Ὁ) Perf. 
ἐλήλυθα. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


2. The Coming of Christ, like the Mission, is regarded both as a simple 
fact realised historically once for all (ἦλθον), and as an abiding fact (ἥκω, 
ἐλήλυθα). It is also set forth as a present fact being realised at the 
moment, and as a future fact of which the fulfilment is potentially begun 
(ἔρχομαι)". 

The simple fact of Christ’s Coming is affirmed by St John both in 
respect of His true Divinity as the Word, and of His true humanity. 

John i. 11 εἰς τὰ ἴδια ἦλθεν [τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν]. 

1 John ν. 6 ὁ ἐλθὼν δι’ ὕδατος καὶ αἵματος Ἰησοῦς Χριστός. 

In the discourses of the Lord the fact of His Coming, the fact of the 
Incarnation, is connected with the manifold issues which it involved: 

John ix. 39 εἰς κρίμα ἐγὼ εἰς τὸν κόσμον τοῦτον ἦλθον ἵνα of μὴ βλέποντες 

«καὶ οἱ βλέποντες... 
— xX. 10 ἐγὼ ἦλθον ἵνα ζωὴν ἔχωσιν καὶ περισσὸν ἔχωσιν. 
— xii. 47 οὐκ ἦλθον ἵνα κρίνω τὸν κόσμον ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα σώσω τὸν κόσμον. 
— xv. 22 εἰ μὴ ἦλθον καὶ ἐλάλησα οὐκ ἂν εἶχον ἁμαρτίαν. 

And the Lord bases the truth of His witness on His consciousness of 
the-fact : 

John viii. 14 ἀληθής ἐστιν ἡ μαρτυρία μου ὅτι οἶδα πόθεν ἦλθον Kai ποῦ 

ὑπάγω (contrasted with πόθεν ἔρχομαι). 

The divine relation implied in this use of ‘came’ is expressed more 
distinctly by the verb ‘came forth’ (ἐξῆλθον). This is used in the Lord’s 
words with different prepositions (ἐκ, παρά): 

John viii. 42 ἐγὼ ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐξῆλθον καὶ ἥκω. 

— xvi. 28 ἐξῆλθον ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ ἐλήλυθα εἰς τὸν κόσμον. 
-- 27 πεπιστεύκατε ὅτι ἐγὼ παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐξῆλθον. 
— xvii. 8 ἔγνωσαν...ὅτι παρὰ σοῦ ἐξῆλθον. 

And it is significant that St John and the disciples use the word with a 
yet different turn of thought (ἀπό): 

John xiii. 3 εἰδὼς...ὅτι ἀπὸ θεοῦ ἐξῆλθεν. 

— xvi. 30 πιστεύομεν ὅτι ἀπὸ θεοῦ ἐξῆλθες". 

The perfect (ἐλήλυθα) serves to bring out the abiding significance of the 

fact of Christ’s Coming, the necessary effects which it has as distinguished 








1 The usage in John i. 9 ἦν τὸ φῶς ἀλλὰ μάχαιραν. ἦλθον γὰρ διχά- 
τὸ ἀληθωνν....... ἐρχόμενον is unique. σαι...... 
See note. Luke xii. 49 πῦρ ἦλθον βαλεῖν ἐπὶ 
2 Τὸ is of interest to compare the τὴν γῆν. 
instances of the use of ἦλθον, ἐλήλυθα Matt. xi. 19 || Luke vii. 33 ἦλθεν 
in the Synoptic Gospels: (Lk. ἐλήλυθεν) ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώ- 
Matt. v. 17 οὐκ ἦλθον καταλῦσαι που ἐσθίων καὶ πίνων. 
ἀλλὰ πληρώσαι. xx. 28 || Mark x. 45 ὁ υἱὸς 
ix. 13 || Mark ii. 17 οὐκ ἦλθον τοῦ ἀνθρώπου οὐκ ἦλθεν διακονηθῆ- 
καλέσαι δικαίους ἀλλὰ ἁμαρτωλούς" ναι... 
Luke v. 32 οὐκ ἐλήλυθα κ. ὃ. ἀ. Luke xix. τὸ ἦλθεν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀν- 
a. els μετάνοιαν. Opwrov ζητῆσαι καὶ σῶσαι τὸ 





X. 34 οὐκ ἦλθον βαλεῖν εἰρήνην ἀπολωλός, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 127 


from its general issues. So St John uses the tense in connexion with the 
testing power of Christ revealed as ‘light’ and ‘in flesh’: 

John iii, 19 τὸ φῶς ἐλήλυθεν εἰς τὸν κόσμον καὶ ἠγάπησαν of ἄνθρωποι 

μᾶλλον τὸ σκότος... 

1 John iv. 2 πᾶν πνεῦμα ὃ ὁμολογεῖ Ἴ, Χ. ἐν σαρκὶ ἔληλυθότα ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ 

ἐστίν. 

And the Lord thus speaks of the special character of His Coming: 

John v. 43 ἐγὼ ἐλήλυθα ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ πατρός μου. 

— xii. 46 ἐγὼ φώς εἰς τὸν κόσμον ἐλήλυθα. 
— xviii. 37 ἐλήλυθα εἰς τὸν κόσμον ἵνα μαρτυρήσω τῇ ἀληθείᾳ. 
and generally: 

John vii. 28 καὶ ἀπ᾽ ἐμαυτοῦ οὐκ ἐλήλυθα (viii. 42 οὐδὲ dn’ ἐμ. ἐλ.). 

— xvi. 28 ἐξῆλθον ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ ἐλήλυθα εἰς τὸν κόσμον. 

The verb ἥκω is used in this connexion twice only: 

John viii. 42 ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐξῆλθον καὶ ἥκω. 

1 John ν. 20 ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ ἥκει. 

It occurs also in quotations from the Lxx. Hebr. x. 7, 9 (κω); Rom. x. 
26; Heb. x. 37 (ἥξει) ; and of the future Coming of Christ; Apoc. ii. 25, 
iii. 3. 

The present ἔρχομαι occurs to describe a Coming realised at the (c) Pres. 
moment: ἔρχομαι. 

John viii. 14 πόθεν ἔρχομαι (contrasted with πόθεν ἤλθον), 
and as a future fact potentially included in the present: 

John xiv. 3 πάλιν ἔρχομαι. 

= 18, 28 ἔρχομαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς. 
— xxi. 22 f. ἕως ἔρχομαι. 

2 John 7 of μὴ ὁμολογοῦντες "I. Χ. ἐρχόμενον ἐν σαρκί. 

Comp. John iii. 31 f. ὁ ἄνωθεν (ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ) ἐρχόμενος. 

See also Apoc. i. 7, ii. 6, iii. 11, xxii. 7, 12, 20. 

The passages John viii. 14, 42, xvi. 27 f. will repay particular study as 
illustrating the different forms. 

3. The mode of Christ’s Coming is exhaustively set forth in the three 3. Incar- 


phrases in which it is connected with ‘flesh’ First there is the fundamental “470%: 
statement: 


ἥκω. 


John i. 14 ὁ λόγος σὰρξ ἐγένετο. 

And then this fact is connected with the past and present: 

1 John iv. 2 (ὁμολογεῖν) Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα (ἐληλυ- 

θέναι), 
and with the future: 

2 John 7 (ὁμολογεῖν) Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐρχόμενον ἐν σαρκί. 

The ‘manifestation’ (φανερωθῆναι) of the Lord is noticed by St John 4- Mant- 
in regard to the great crises in His progressive revelation. Thus it is said *"S™4T10"- 
that He was ‘manifested’ by the Incarnation: 

1 John i. 2 ἡ ζωὴ ἐφανερώθη. 

— iii 5 ἐκεῖνος ἐφανερώθη ἵνα τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἄρῃ. 
-- 8 ἐφανερώθη ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ ἵνα λύσῃ τὰ ἔργα τοῦ διαβόλου. 


128 


Complete- 
ness of the 
teaching. 


The titles 
of believ- 
ers in the 
New Test. 
Christians. 


Four 
titles: 
disciples, 
brethren, 
saints, 
believers. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


and when He was openly presented to the people: 

John i. 31 ἵνα φανερωθῇ τῷ Ἰσραὴλ διὰ τοῦτο ἦλθον. 

So also ‘He was manifested’ and ‘He manifested Himself’ in the new 
life after the Resurrection : 

John xxi. 14 ἐφανερώθη ᾿Ιησοῦς τοῖς μαθηταῖς. 

-- 1 ἐφανέρωσεν ἑαυτὸν ᾿Ιησοῦς τοῖς μαθηταῖς. 
and Christians still look for a manifestation in the future: 
1 John ii. 28 ἵνα ἐὰν φανερωθῇ σχῶμεν παρρησίαν...ἐν τῇ παρουσίᾳ αὐτοῦ. 
— iii. 2 ἐὰν φανερωθῇ ὅμοιοι αὐτῷ ἐσόμεθα. 

It is not necessary to draw out in detail the teaching of these pregnant 
words. They offer the fullest view which man can gain of the Person of the 
Lord in its absolute unity, truly human and truly divine. St John says both 
‘the Word became flesh’ and ‘Jesus Christ came in flesh’; and further he 
speaks of ‘Jesus Christ coming in flesh.’ Again he says equally ‘the Life was 
manifested,’ ‘the Life which was with the Father, and ‘He [Jesus Christ] 
was manifested,’ and ‘the Son of God was manifested.’ Now one aspect 
of the Lord’s Person, now another is brought forward without change. 
There is nothing in the least degree formal in the different statements: 
they spring directly out of the immediate context as answering to one 
sovereign conception: and when put together they combine to produce 
a final harmony, the fulness of apostolic teaching, upon the central Truth 
of the Gospel. The least variation adds something to the completeness 
of the idea; and the minute correspondences bring an assurance that 
the result which the combination of the different phrases suggests answers 
to the thought of the Apostle which underlay all that he wrote. 


Additional Note on 111. 14. Titles of believers. 


The different names which are given to Christians in the Apostolic 
writings offer an instructive study of the original conception of the Gospel. 
The origin of the historic Gentile name ‘Christians’ (Χριστιανοί, comp. 
Pompeiant) is noticed in Acts xi. 26; and it is used as familiarly known 
by Agrippa (Acts xxvi. 26) and by St Peter (1 Pet. ix. 16; comp. Tac. 
Ann. xv. 44). From the time of Ignatius this name, with the correlative 
for ‘Christianity’ (Χριστιανισμός), passed into general use (comp. Ign. ad 
Magn. 4, το; ad Rom. 3; Mart. Polyc. 10); but it was natural that in 
the first age of the Church it should not be used by believers among them- 
selves. 

Four terms find more or less currency in the N. T. which express 
different aspects of the Christian view of the Christian position: ‘the 
disciples’ (οἱ μαθηταί), ‘the brethren’ (οἱ ἀδελφοί), ‘the saints’ (of ἅγιοι), 
‘the believers’ (οἱ πιστοί, οἱ πιστεύοντες). These fall into two pairs, of which 
the first pair, ‘disciples, ‘brethren,’ marks predominantly traits of personal 
relationship, and the second pair, ‘saints, ‘faithful’ traits of general 
character. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


The earliest title is that of ‘the disciples’ This answers to ‘master,’ 
‘teacher’ (διδάσκαλος), and passed from the Jewish schools to the followers 
of Christ during His lifetime. It was used both in a wider sense for all 
who attached themselves to Him (John ii. 11 ff.; vi. 61, 66; vii. 3) and also 
in a narrower sense for ‘the twelve’ (John xiii. 5 ff.). After the Ascension 
it is still employed absolutely in the narrative of the Acts to describe 
believers generally (vi. 1, 2, 7; ix. 19, 25, 38; xi. 26, 29; xiii. 52; xiv. 20, 
22, 28; xvili. 23, 27; xix. 9, 30; xx. 1; xxi 4, 16); and so it is found in 
the record of a speech of St Peter (xv. 10) and of a speech of St Paul (xx. 
30). The discipleship is once connected with the human teacher (ix. 25 of 
μι αὐτοῦ) and once with the Lord (ix. 19). It is remarkable that in one 
place (xix. 1) those who had only received John’s Baptism are spoken of as 
disciples. The title does not occur in the Epistles or in the Apocalypse. 

It is significant that the first title given to the body of believers after 
the Ascension is ‘the brethren’ (Acts i. 15 true text); and from this time 
onwards it occurs in all the groups of Apostolic writings. Thus in the Acts 
it is found in the narrative: ix. 30; x. 23; xi. 29; xiv. 2; xv. I, 3, 22, 32 f, 
40; Xvi. 2, 40; xvii. 10; xviii. 18,27; xxi. 7, 17; xxviii. 14 ἢ; and once in 
the record of St Paul’s words: xv. 36. Twice in the same book it is used 
of unconverted Jews: xxii. 5 (St Paul’s words); xxviii. 21. St Paul uses 
the title throughout his Epistles: 1 Thess. iv. 10; v. 26 f.; 1 Cor. viii 12; 
xvi. 20; Gal. i. 2; Rom. xvi. 14; Phil. iv. 21; Eph. vi. 23; Col. iv. 15; 
1 Tim. iv. 6; 2 Tim. iv. 21. In the writings of St John it occurs: 1 John iii. 
14; 3 John 5, 10; John xxi. 23. St Peter uses the abstract term ‘the 
brotherhood’ (ἡ ἀδελφότης, τ Pet. ii. 17; v. 9). The singular is not 
uncommonly used (6... Rom. xvi. 23; 1 Cor. vii. 15), and especially with a 
personal pronoun, ‘thy brother,’ ‘his brother’ (6.0. Rom. xiv. 10; 1 Jobn 
ii. 9 ff). Compare c.ii. gnote. On ‘the friends’ see 3 John 15. 

The general idea of ‘the believers’ is expressed in three different forms 
which convey shades of difference in the application of the common mean- 
ing: ‘the believers’ (of πιστοί), ‘they that believe’ (of πιστεύοντες), ‘they 
that believed’ (of πιστεύσαντες). The first (of πιστοῦ is found Acts x. 45 


(οἱ ἐκ περιτομῆς moroi); τ Tim. iv. 12; comp. Eph. i. 1; 1 Tim. iv. 3;. 


1 Pet.i.21. ‘They that believe’ (οἱ πιστεύοντες) occurs: 1 Pet. ii. 7; 1 Thess. 
i. 7; i. 10 f.; 1 Cor. i. 21; Rom. iii. 22; Eph. i. 19. ‘They that believed’ 
(οἱ πιστεύσαντες) occurs: Acts ii 44; iv. 32; 2 Thess. i. 10; Hebr. iv. 3. 
In the two last phrases the historic reference to the act of belief still 
remains. 


129 


1. The 
disciples. 


2. The 
brethren. 


3. The 
believers. 


The title ‘the saints’ is characteristic of St Paul and of the Apocalypse. 4- The 


It occurs four times in the Acts, twice in connexion with St Paul’s conver- 
sion (Acts ix. 13 τοὺς ἁγίους σου; XXvi. 10), and twice in connexion with the 
episode of St Peter's visit to Lydda (ix. 32) and Joppa (ix. 41). It is found 
also once in St Jude (Jude 3); but not in any other of the Catholic Epistles 
(comp. I Pet. ii.5,9). In St Paul it is frequent and distributed throughout 
his Epistles: 1 Thess. iii. 13; 2 Thess. i. 10; 1 Cor. vi. 1 ἢ ; xiv. 33; Xvi 1, 
153 2 Cor. i. 1; vill. 4; ix. 1, 12; xiii, 12; Rom. xii. 13; xv. 25 ἢ, 31; 
avi. 2, 15; Phil. 1. 1; iv. 22; Eph. i. 1, 15, 18; iv. 12; vi. 18; Col. i. 2, 4, 
12, 26; Philem. 5, 7. It is found also in Hebr. vi. 10; xiii. 24. In the 


Ww. J. 9 


saints. 


130 


General 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Apocalypse it is found: v. 8; viii. 3 £; xi. 18; xiii. 7, το; xiv. 12; xvii. 6; 
xviii. 20; xix. 8. 
The main differences of conception between the four titles are evident. 


relation of Christians stand in the position of learners in the schoul of their Lord. 


the titles, 


The titles 
in con- 
nexion. 


The lesson which they have to learn surpasses all others. But the relation 
to the Divine Master is at once embodied in a new relation to fellow- 
believers. So the title ‘the disciples’ is soon lost in that of ‘the brethren,’ 
In the same way the title of ‘the faithful,’ which corresponds to ‘disciples, 
is far less common and characteristic than ‘the saints’ (‘the holy’), which 
marks the recognised consecration of believers. 

But while these broad distinctions are obvious, it is not easy to seize 
the exact force of the particular titles except that of ‘the faithful’ on each 
occasion, or even when they come near together, as ‘disciples’ and 
‘brethren’; Acts xi. 29; xviii. 27; xxi. 16 f.: ‘disciples’ and ‘saints’; Acts 
ix. 38, 41: ‘brethren’ and ‘saints’; 1 Cor. xvi. 15, 20; Rom. xvi. 14 ἢ; 
Eph. vi. 18, 23. It seems not unlikely that the title ‘the brethren’ was 
carried over from the ‘Israel according to the flesh’ to the spiritual Israel, 
and was specially used of the Jewish congregations. This view is supported 
by Acts xxii. 5; xxviii. 21. But in any case the title was soon extended 
more widely: Acts xv. I. 


Additional Note on iii. 16. St John’s conception of love 
(ἀγάπη). 


1. The verb ἀγαπᾶν occurs throughout Greek literature from Homer 
downwards. The noun ἀγάπη belongs to Biblical literature exclusively. 
It occurs first in the Lxx. (for N08 most commonly, which is also 
rendered by ἀγάπησις and rarely by φιλία), where it is found in 2 Sam. xiii. 
15 (μέγα τὸ μῖσος ὃ ἐμίσησεν αὐτὴν ὑπὲρ τὴν ἀγάπην ἣν ἠγάπησεν αὐτήν [Θάμαρ]), 
thirteen times in Eccles. and Cant., and in Jer. ii. 2 (ἐμνήσθην... ἀγάπης 
τελειώσεώς σου). Itis not found in the Pentateuch; nor is it quoted from 
Josephus (Philo, Quod Deus immut. 14 φόβον τε καὶ ἀγάπην). The word is 
used in all the books of the New Testament except the Gospel of St Mark, 
Acts, and the Epistle of St James (in the Synoptic Gospels only Matt. xxiv. 
12; Luke xi. 42). The collateral form ἀγάπησις occurs in the Lxx. and later 
Greek writers but not in the New Testament. 

Ἔρως occurs twice in the Lxx.: Prov. vii. 18; xxx. 16 (as also ἐρᾶν and 
ἐραστής), but it is not found in N. T. Comp. Ign. Rom. 7, ὁ ἐμὸς ἔρως 
ἐσταύρωται and Bp Lightfoot’s note. 

The one compound of ἀγαπ- which is recorded is the Homeric ἀγαπήνωρ. 


2. The words ἀγαπᾶν, ἀγάπη are used to describe the feeling of 
I. God (the Father) for 
(1) Zhe Son: 
John ili. 35 ὁ πατὴρ ἀγαπᾷ τὸν υἱόν. 
— x. 17 διὰ τοῦτό με ὁ πατὴρ ἀγαπᾷ ὅτι... 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 131 
John xv. 9 καθὼς ἠγάπησέ με ὁ πατήρ, κἀγώ... 
— — ἰὸ μένω αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ. 
— Xvii. 23 .. «καθὼς ἐμὲ ἠγάπησας. 
— — 24 ἠγάπησάς με πρὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου. 
-- — 26 ἵνα ἡ ἀγάπη ἣν ἠγάπησάς με ἐν αὐτοῖς ἢ... 
(2) The world: 
John iii. 16 οὕτως ἠγάπησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν κόσμον ὥστε... 
(39 Men: 
John xiv. 21 ὁ ἀγαπῶν με ἀγαπηθήσεται ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρός μου. 
— — 23 ὁ πατήρ μου ἀγαπήσει αὐτόν. 
— xvii. 23 ἠγάπησας αὐτοὺς καθὼς ἐμὲ ἠγάπησας. 
1 John iv. 10 αὐτὸς [ὁ θεὸς] ἠγάπησεν ἡμᾶς. 
— — 11 εἰ οὕτως ὁ θεὸς ἠγάπησεν ἡμᾶς... 
Comp. Apoc. xx. 9 τὴν πόλιν τὴν ἠγαπημένην. 
Φιλεῖν is found in a corresponding connexion in regard to 
(1) The Son: 
John v. 20 ὁ πατὴρ φιλεῖ (v. 1. ἀγαπᾷ) τὸν, υἱόν. 
(2) Men: 
John xvi. 27 ὁ πατὴρ φιλεῖ ὑμᾶς. 
II. The Son, for 
(() Lhe Father: 
John xiv. 31 iva γνῷ ὁ κόσμος ὅτι ἀγαπῶ τὸν πατέρα. 
(2) The disciples: 
severally 
xi. 5 ἠγάπα δὲ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς τὴν Mapéar... 
xiii. 23; xix. 26; xxi. 7, 20 (εἷς τῶν μαθητῶν) ὃν ἠγάπα ὁ Ἰησοῦς. 
Xiv. 21 ἐγὼ ἀγαπήσω αὐτόν... 
Apoe. iii. 9 ὅτι ἐγὼ ἠγάπησά σε. 
generally 
xiii. τ ἀγαπήσας τοὺς ἰδίους τοὺς ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ εἰς τέλος ἠγάπησεν 
αὐτούς. 
ΣΙ, 34; XV. 9, [2 ἠγάπησα ὑμᾶς- μείνατε... 
[— 9 μείνατε ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ τῇ ἐμῇ] } 
— 10 μενεῖτε ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ μου καθώς... 
Apoe. i. 5 τῷ ἀγαπῶντι ἡμᾶς. 
Compare the use of φιλεῖν for the feeling of Christ towards men severally. 
John xi. 3 ide ὃν φιλεῖς ἀσθενεῖ. 
— — 36 ἴδε πῶς ἐφίλει αὐτόν. 
— XX. 2 μαθητὴς ὃν ἐφίλει 6 “Ingots. 
Apoc. iii. 19 ἐγὼ ὅσους ἐὰν φιλῶ, ἐλέγχω. 
III. Men for 
(1) God (the Father): 


John Vv. 42 τὴν ἀγάπην τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ ἔχετε ἐν ἑαυτοῖς. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


1 John ii. 15 οὐκ ἔστιν ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ πατρὸς ἐν αὐτῷ. 
— iv. 10 οὐχ ὅτι ἡμεῖς ἠγαπήκαμεν τὸν θεόν. 
— -- 2ο ἢ ἐάν τις εἴπῃ ὅτι ᾿Αγαπῶ τον θεόν. 
— V. I πᾶς ὁ ἀγαπῶν τὸν γεννήσαντα... 
----- 2... «ὅταν τὸν θεὸν ἀγαπῶμεν. 
() Christ: 
John viii. 42 εἰ ὁ θεὸς πατὴρ ὑμῶν ἣν ἠγαπᾶτε ἂν ἐμέ. 
— Xiv. 15 ἐὰν ἀγαπᾶτέ με... 
— — 21 -..«ἐκεῖνός ἐστιν ὁ ἀγαπῶν pe: ὁ δὲ ἀγαπῶν με... 
-- — 23 ἐάν τις ἀγαπᾷ με... 
— — 24 ὃ μὴ ἀγαπῶν με... 
— — 28 εἰ ἠγαπᾶτέ με ἐχάρητε av... 
[--- xv. 9 μείνατε ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ τῇ ἐμῇ... 1 
— xxi. 15 f. Σίμων Ἰωάνου ἀγαπᾷς pe...; 
(3) The brethren: 
John xiii. 34; xv. 17 (ἐντολὴν) ἵνα ἀγαπᾶτε ἀλλήλους. 
— — 35...ἐὰν ἀγάπην ἔχητε ἐν ἀλλήλοις. 
— Xv. 12 ἵνα ἀγαπᾶτε ἀλλήλους καθὼς ἠγάπησα ὑμᾶς. 
1 John ii. 10; iv. 21 ὁ ἀγαπῶν τὸν ἀδελφόν... 
— iii, 10, 14; iv. 20 ὁ μὴ ἀγαπῶν τὸν ἀδελφόν. 
— — 11, 23; iv. 7, 11; 2 John § (ἀγγελία) ἵνα ἀγαπῶμεν 
ἀλλήλους. 
-- —14...6rt ἀγαπῶμεν τοὺς ἀδελφούς. 
— ¥. 1 .--«ἀγαπᾷ καὶ τὸν γεγεννημένον ἐξ αὐτοῦ. 
— —2 ὅτι ἀγαπῶμεν τὰ τέκνα τοῦ θεοῦ. 
2 John I ods ἐγὼ ἀγαπῶ. 
3 John I ὃν ἐγὼ ἀγαπῶ. 
(4) Life: 
Apoce. xii. 11 οὐκ ἠγάπησαν τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτῶν ἄχρι θανάτου. 
(5) Evil (darkness): 
John iii. 19 ἠγάπησαν.. μᾶλλον τὸ σκότος ἣ τὸ φῶς. 
— xii. 43 ἠγάπησαν τὴν δόξαν τῶν ἀνθρώπων... 
1 John ii. 15 μὴ ἀγαπᾶτε τὸν κόσμον μηδὲ τὰ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ" ἐάν τις 
ἀγαπᾷ τὸν κόσμον... 
So φιλεῖν is used of the feeling of men for 
(1) Christ: 
John xvi. 27 ὑμεῖς ἐμὲ πεφιλήκατε. 
— xxi 15 ff σὺ οἶδας (γινώσκεις) ὅτι φιλῶ σε. 
-- — 17 φιλεῖς με; 
Comp. 1 Cor. xvi. 22 εἴ τις οὐ φιλεῖ τὸν κύριον. 
(2) Life: 
John xii. 25 ὁ φιλῶν τὴν ψυχήν. 
(3) vil: 
Apoe. xxii. 15 ὁ φιλῶν..-«ψεῦδος. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 133 


Comp. John xv. 19 ὁ κόσμος ἂν τὸ ἴδιον ἐφίλει. 
Φιλεῖν is not used by St John of the feeling of man for the Father or for 
man (Matt. x. 27; Tit. iii. 15). 


Φιλία occurs only James iv. 4 ἡὶ φιλία τοῦ κόσμου ἔχθρα τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν. 


3. The words ἀγαπᾶν, ἀγάπη are also used absolutely. 
1 John iii. 1 ποταπὴν ἀγάπην δέδωκεν ἡμῖν ὁ θεός... 
— — 16 ἐν τούτῳ ἐγνώκαμεν τὴν ἀγάπην... 
— —I18 μὴ ἀγαπῶμεν λόγῳ... 
τ 18 μὴ ἀγαπῶμεν λόγῳ... 
— ἵν. 7 ἡ ἀγάπη ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν. 
— -- ἴά. πᾶς 6 ἀγαπῶν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ γεγέννηται. 
— — 86 μὴ ἀγαπῶν οὐκ ἔγνω τὸν θεόν. 
— -- ἴα, 16 ὁ θεὸς ἀγάπη ἐστίν. 
— —10 ἐν τούτῳ ἐστὶν ἡ ἀγάπη, οὐχ ὅτι... 
— ---͵ιό ὁμένων ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ. 
ae , ca wae τ 
— —I17 ἐν τούτῳ τετελείωται ἡ ἀγάπη μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν, iva... 
, ΝΜ Sparen 
— — 18 φόβος οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ. 
— -- ἴα. ἡ τελεία ἀγάπη ἔξω βάλλει τὸν φόβον. 
— ---ἰά. ὁ φοβούμενος οὐ τετελείωται ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ. 
— — IQ ἡμεῖς ἀγαπῶμεν, ὅτι... 
2 John 3 ἐν ἀληθείᾳ καὶ ἀγάπῃ. 
— 6 αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἀγάπη, iva... 
, ΚΣ ΘΕ Se oe 
3 John 6 €paptupyoay cou TH ἀγαπῇῃ. 


4. From a consideration of these passages it will be seen that ἀγαπᾶν, 
ἀγάπη are an expression of character, determined, as we are forced to 
conceive of things, by will, and not of spontaneous, natural emotion. 

In this sense ‘love’ is the willing communication to others of that which 
we have and are; and the exact opposite of that passion which is the 
desire of personal appropriation (ἐρᾶν, ἔρως). 

5. God Himself is love. The creation and preservation of the world 
are in essence a continuous manifestation of His love; but, as things are, 
His love is characteristically made known through redemption, that is 
the consummation of the divine counsel of creation in spite of the intrusion 
of sin (1 John iii. 16; iv. 9). So it is that the revelation of the divine love 
is referred to an absolute (eternal) moment (ἠγάπησας, ἠγάπησεν) both in 
relation to the Son and also to the world and to men. 

6. At the same time God who is love is also the source of love 
(1 John iv. 7). He endows believers with love (1 John iii. 1, 16 f. ; iv. 9, 12, 
16; 2 John 6); and this love becomes in them a fountain of moral energy, 
issuing necessarily in self-sacrifice (John xv. 13; 1 John iii. 16). 

On the other hand the love of evil is so far moral suicide. 


7. It is of interest to notice that ‘love’ is connected by St Paul with 
each Person of the Holy Trinity : 

ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ θεοῦ" 2 Thess. iii. 5; 2 Cor. xiii.13; Rom. v. 5; (Eph. ii. 4). 

ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ χριστοῦ" 2 Cor. v. 14; Rom. viii. 35; Eph. iii. 19. 

ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ πνεύματος" Rom. xv. 30. 


134 


Limita- 
tion of St 
John’s 
view of 
man’s 
nature. 


i. Flesh 
(σάρξ). 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


In each case the thought appears to be of the love of which God is the 
source rather than the object. But the love of God in man becomes in 
him a spring of love. On the idea of ‘the love of God’ see c. ii. 5 note. 


Additional Note on iii. 19. The nature of man. 


St John does not, like St Paul, give any definite analysis of the consti- 
tution or of the spiritual experience of man. But he recognises the same 
elements in human nature. Like St Paul, he distinguishes ‘the flesh,’ 
‘the soul,’ ‘the spirit,’ ‘the heart” But it is worthy of notice that the 
characteristic intellectual faculties are rarély noticed by him. ‘ Under- 
standing’ (διάνοια) occurs only once in the most remarkable passage 1 John 
vy. 20; and ‘mind’ (νοῦς) is found only in the Apocalypse (xiii. 18; xvii. 9). 
‘Conscience’ (συνείδησις) is nowhere mentioned by St John (contrast [John] 
viii. 8). In St Paul these words are not unfrequent. For St John’s use of 
γινώσκειν see ¢. ii. 3 note. 

The term ‘flesh’ (σάρξ) describes the element with the characteristics 
of the element (comp. 1 Cor. xv. 39). It includes all that belongs to the 
life of sensation, all by which we are open to the physical influences of 
pleasure and pain, which naturally sway our actions. 

As applied to human nature ‘flesh’ describes humanity so far as it 
is limited and defined by earthly conditions. In ‘flesh’ lies the point of 
connexion between man and the lower world. Through flesh come the 
temptations which belong to sense. 

The word is used of mankind (as in O. T.) John xvii. 2 (πᾶσα σάρξ) to 
describe them under the aspect of earthly transitoriness. 

‘Flesh’ is contrasted with ‘spirit,’ not as evil with good, but as the 
ruling element of one order with the ruling element of another: John iii. 
6; vi. 63. 

By ‘flesh’ we are united to earth; and by ‘spirit’ to heaven. 

‘The will of the flesh’ (John i. 13) is the determination which belongs 
to the earthly powers of man as such. 

‘The desire of the flesh’ (1 John ii. 16) is the desire which, as it springs 
out of man’s present earthly constitution, is confined within the earthly 
sphere and rises no higher. 

‘Judgment after the flesh’ (John viii. 15) is external, superficial, 
limited by what catches the senses (comp. 2 Cor. v. 16). 

Thus the idea of evil attaches to the flesh not in virtue of what it 
is essentially, but from the undue preponderance which is given to it. The 
flesh serves for the manifestation of character. It ministers to other 
powers, It becomes evil when it is made supreme or dominates. It does 
not include the idea of sinfulness, but it describes human personality on 
the side which tends to sin, and on which we actually have sinned. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 135 


The essential conception of σάρξ is seen in its application to Christ. Use of | 
(1) in His Person : Steen 
John i. 14 ὁ λόγος σὰρξ ἐγένετο. Christ. 


1 John iv. 2 ἐληλυθὼς ἐν σαρκί. 

2 John 7 ἐρχόμενος ἐν σαρκί. 

Compare 1 Tim. iii. 16 ἐφανερώθη ἐν σαρκί. 

Col. i. 22 τὸ σῶμα τῆς σαρκὸς αὐτοῦ. 

And 

(2) in His Work : 

John vi. 51 ἡ σάρξ μου ὑπὲρ τῆς τοῦ κόσμου ζωῆς. 

-- 53 φαγεῖν τὴν σάρκα τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου καὶ πιεῖν αὐτοῦ τὸ 
αἷμα. 
-- 56 ὁ τρώγων μου τὴν σάρκα καὶ πίνων μου τὸ αἷμα. 

In these passages ‘flesh’ is seen to describe the element οἵ Christ’s 
perfect humanity. 

It may be added that while σῶμα is found in St John (John ii. 21; xx. 

12, &c.), it is never used metaphorically, and it does not occur in the 
epistles (Apoc. xviii. 13=mancipiorum). In the Apocalypse odpé is found 
only in the plural. 

The sense of the word represented by ‘soul, ‘life’ (ψυχή) is often ii. Soul 
obscure in other apostolic writers from the complex nature of the living ‘life’ 
man; but in St John it is used only for the personal principle of our vx). 
present earthly life, the vital energy of the σάρξ (yet notice John x. 24). 

It is used 

(1) of men generally : 

John xii. 25 (comp. Luke xiv. 26; xvii. 33). 

— xiii. 37 f. τιθέναι τὴν ψυχήν. 
— xv. 13 id.; 1 John iii. 16 τά. ; 3 John 2. 

And 

(2) of Christ : 

John xii. 27; x. 11, 15, 17 τὴν Ψ. τιθέναι. 

1 John iii. 16 id. 

With the phrase τιθέναι τὴν ψυχὴν ὑπέρ (x. 11,15; comp. Matt. xx. 28) 
must be contrasted (δοῦναι) τὴν σάρκα ὑπέρ (Vi. 51). 

In the Apocalypse Ψυχή is used in the most unusual sense of disem- 
bodied ‘souls’; vi. 9; xx. 4. 

While the ‘soul’ (ψυχή) expresses the sum of man’s present vital iii. Spirit 
powers, the ‘spirit’ (πνεῦμα) describes the quickening element which (πνεῦμα). 
belongs to a heavenly sphere (comp. Rom. viii. 10) as the flesh describes the 
earthly element: John iii. 6 (5); vi. 63. 

It is used of the Lord: John xiii. 21 (comp. xii. 27); xi. 33. 

Compare the phrases ‘to become in spirit,’ ‘in spirit) found in the 
Apocalypse : i. 10 (ἐγενόμην ἐν πνεύματι) ; iv. 2 (id.); xvii. 13 (ἐν πνεύματι); 

xxi. 10 (éd.). 

The sense the ‘breath of life’ is wholly distinct : John xix. 30 (comp. 
Matt. xxvii. 50; Lk. viii. 55); Apoc. xi. 11 (πνεῦμα ζωῆς) ; Xill. 15 (δοῦναι πν. 
τῇ εἰκόνι). 


136 


iv. ‘Heart’ 
(καρδία). 


Thenames 
of the 
Lord in 
the Epi- 
stles, 


The idea 
of ‘the 
Name.’ 


The 
special 
names: 
His Son 
Jesus 
Christ, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


The seat of individual character, of personal feeling and moral determi- 
nation, is the ‘heart’ (καρδία), The elements already considered are 
morally colourless in themselves, they are generic and not individual. 
The mention of the heart is comparatively rare in St John. But he shews 
that it is the seat of sorrow (John xvi. 6), of joy (xvi. 22), of distress gene- 
rally (xiv. 1, 27), and also of purpose (xiii. 2), and spiritual discernment 
(xii. 40, LXx.). 

The most remarkable passage in which he describes the office of the 
heart is in 1 John iii. 1g—21. In this the heart appears as representing 
the whole conscious moral nature of man. The heart in fact includes the 
conscience, and covers the whole range of life. It takes account not only of 
the abstract rule but of all the personal circumstances which go to charac- 
terise action. 

Compare Apoc. ii. 23; xvii. 17; xviii. 7. 


Additional Note on iii. 23. The Names of the Lord. 


Something has been already said on the use of the Divine Names in the 
Epistles of St John (Additional Note on i. 2). It is however of deep 
interest to study in detail the exact relation of the several Names of the 
Lord to the contexts in which they occur. Such an inquiry will leave, 
I believe, a strong conviction in the mind of the student that each Name is 
perfectly fitted to present that aspect of the Lord’s Person which is domi- 
nant at the particular point in the Apostle’s exposition of the Truth. 

Here, as elsewhere in the Bible, the Name has two distinct and yet 
closely connected meanings, It may express the revelation of the Divine 
Being given by a special title ; or the whole sum of the manifold revela- 
tions gathered up together so as to form one supreme revelation. It is 
used in the latter sense in regard to the revelation of God in Christ in 
3 John 7 ὑπὲρ τοῦ ὀνόματος, where τὸ ὄνομα, ‘the Name’ absolutely, includes 
the essential elements of the Christian Creed, the complete revelation of 
Christ’s Person and Work in relation to God and man (comp. Acts v. 41; 
John xx. 31). In ii. 12 διὰ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ the term is more limited. The 
Person Who is present to St John through the paragraph is Christ as He 
lived on earth and gave Himself for those whom He called brethren (ii. 6 ; 
comp. Hebr. ii. 11 f£). In iii. 23, v. 13 the exact sense of ‘the Name’ is 
defined by the words which follow. 

From the Name thus generally referred to or defined we pass to the 
actual Names used. The full title His Son Jesus Christ (ὁ vids αὐτοῦ 
Ἰησοῦς Χριστός) is found i. 3, iii. 23, v. 20. The divine antecedent is 
differently described in the three cases, and this difference slightly colours 
the phrase. In i. 3 it is ‘the Father’ (compare 2 John 3 παρὰ θεοῦ πατρός, 
καὶ παρὰ Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ πατρός); in iii, 23, ‘God’; and in v. 20, 
‘He that is true.’ Thus in the three cases the Sonship of Jesus Christ is 
regarded in relation to God as the Father, to God as God, and to God as 
perfectly satisfying the divine ideal which man is able to form. Bearing 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 137 


these secondary differences in mind we see that the whole phrase includes 
the two elements of the confession, or the two confessions, which St John 
brings into prominence: ‘Jesus [Christ] is the Son of God’ (iv. 15, v. 5); 
and ‘Jesus is the Christ’ (v. 1; comp. ii. 22). It is in other words ‘the 
Name’ written out at length. 
The constituents of this compressed phrase are all used separately by 
St John: 
(1) Jesus: Jesus, 
ii, 22 ὁ ἀρνούμενος ὅτι Ἰησοῦς οὐκ ἔστιν ὁ χριστός. 
Υ. 1 ὁ πιστεύων ὅτι Ἰησοῦς ἐστὶν ὁ χριστός. 
iv. 3 ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ τὸν Ἰησοῦν. 
In these passages it is obvious that the central thought is of the Lord in 
His perfect, historical, humanity. The use of the definite article in the last 
example probably conveys a reference to Ὁ. 2. 
(2) Christ: Christ, 
2 John 9 ἡ διδαχὴ τοῦ χριστοῦ. 
The title seems to point back to the long preparation under the Old 
Covenant which checks impatience (προάγων) under the New. 
(3) Jesus Christ : Jesus 
11. 1 παράκλητον ἔχομεν... Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν δίκαιον. Christ, 
v.66 ἐλθὼν δὲ ὕδατος καὶ αἵματος, ᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστός. 
2 John 7 οἱ μὴ ὁμολ. Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐρχόμενον ἐν σαρκί. 
Here the idea of the Messianic position of the Lord is no less important 
for the full sense than that of His true humanity. 
In iv. 15 ὅτε Ἰησοῦς [Χριστός] ἐστιν ὁ vids τοῦ θεοῦ the reading is doubt- 
ful. The adoption of Χριστός adds to the completeness of the thought. 
For the clause iv. 2 ὁμολ. Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐν σαρκὶ ἔλ. see note. In 
spite of the close verbal parallel of these words with 2 John 7 the use of 
Ἰησοῦς Χριστός here seems to be differentiated from the sense there br 
ἐληλυθότα as contrasted with ἐρχόμενον. 
(4) the Son: the Son, 
ii. 22 ὁ ἀρνούμενος τὸν πατέρα καὶ τὸν υἱόν. 
— 23 ὁ dpv. τὸν υἱὸν οὐδὲ τὸν πατέρα ἔχει. 
— 23 6 ὁμολογῶν τὸν υἱὸν καὶ τὸν πατέρα ἔχει. 
— 24 ἐν τῷ υἱῷ καὶ ἐν τῷ πατρὶ μενεῖτε. 
iv. 14 ὃ πατὴρ ἀπέσταλκεν τὸν υἱόν. 
Vv. 12 ὃ ἔχων τὸν υἱὸν ἔχει τὴν ζωήν. 
In all these cases the central thought is that of the absolute relation of 
sonship to fatherhood. The argument turns upon essential conceptions of 
son and father. Comp. John v. 19 note. 
(5) the Son of God: the Son 
lil. 8 ἐφανερώθη ὁ vids τοῦ θεοῦ ἵνα λύσῃ τὰ ἔργα τοῦ διαβόλου. of Gad, 
γ. 10 6 πιστεύων εἰς τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ. 
- 12 ὃ μὴ ἔχων τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ. 
— 13 τοῖς mor. εἰς τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ. 
— 20 οἴδαμεν ὅτι ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ ἥκει. 


138 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


With these passages must be compared 
iv. 10 ἀπέστ. τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ, 
v. 9 ff. ὁ υἱὸς αὐτοῦ, 
where the immediate antecedent is ὁ θεός. In all these cases the idea of 
Christ’s divine dignity is equally prominent with that of sonship in relation 
to a father. 
Compare also v. 18 ὁ γεννηθεὶς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ. 


Jesus His (6) Jesus His (God’s) Son: 
Son, i. 7 τὸ αἷμα Ἰησοῦ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ. 
The double title brings out the two truths that ‘the blood’ of Christ 
can be made available for men and is efficacious. 
His Son, (7) His (God’s) Son, His only Son : 
τ only iv. 9 τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ τὸν μονογενῆ. 
ἱ The uniqueness of the gift is the manifestation of love. 

In connexion with these titles it must be added that the title ‘the Son’ 
in various forms is eminently characteristic of the first aud second Epistles, 
in which it occurs 24 (or 25) times (22 or 23+2), more times than in all the 
Epistles of St Paul. 

It is remarkable that the title ‘Lord’ (κύριος) is not found in the 
Epistles (not 2 John 3). It occurs in the narrative of the Gospel and is 
frequent in the Apocalypse. It occurs also in all the other epistles of the 
N. T. except that to Titus. 


The absence of the title may perhaps be explained by the general view 
of the relation of Christ to the believer which is given in the Epistles. 
The central thought is that of fellowship. For the same reason the con- 
ception of external organization is also wanting in the Epistle. 


IV. ἢ 


IV. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


139 


“ \ A , 
VAyarnrol, μὴ παντὶ πνεύματι πιστεύετε, 


> \ ΄ " tA > ΄ cad 
ἀλλὰ δοκιμάζετε Ta πνεύματα εἰ ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν, 


IV. THe RIVALsPIRits ΟΕ TRUTH 
AND Error (iv. 1—6). 


This section is closely connected 
both with what precedes and with 
what follows; and corresponds with 
the first section of this great division 
of the Epistle : 11. 18—29. It contains 
three main thoughts: 


1 There are many spiritual in- 
Jluences at work (0. 1). 

2 The test of spirits lies wn the 
witness to the incarnation (vo. 2, 3). 

3 The test of men lies in the 
recognition of the Truth (vv. 4, 5). 


The progress of thought is parallel 
to that in ii. 18—29 (see p. 67), but 
the argument of St John has passed 
to a new stage. There his teaching 
was centred in the Messiahship, the 
Sonship of Jesus: here in the In- 
carnation of Jesus Christ. There he 
insisted on the original message of the 
Gospel: here he appears to regard 
the fuller interpretation of the mes- 
sage. This section in fact presents 
the conflict of the Faith with its 
counterfeits in the last form, as a con- 
flict of spiritual powers, unseen and 
real. 

1 The many spiritual influences 

Ὁ. 1). 
The ‘many false prophets’ stand 
in a relation towards the Spirit like 
that which the ‘many Antichrists’ oc- 
cupy towards Christ (ii. 18). Through 
them evil spiritual powers find ex- 
pression. Spirits therefore must be 
proved. 

τ Beloved, believe not every spirit, 
but prove the spirits, whether they 
are of God; because many false 
prophets are gone out into the world. 

I. ’Ayamnroi] Comp. ii.7 note. The 
existence of a subtle spiritual danger 
calls out the tenderness of love. 

μὴ παντὶ mv. πιστ.] nolite omni 


spiritut credere V., believe not every 
spirit. The mention of a spirit as the 
characteristic endowment of Christ- 
ians leads to a definition of true and 
false spirits. There are many spiritual 
powers active among men, and our 
first impulse is to believe and to obey 
them. They evidently represent that 
which is not of sight. But some of 
these are evil influences belonging to 
the unseen order. They come to us 
under specious forms of ambition, 
power, honour, knowledge, as distin- 
guished from earthly sensual enjoy- 
ments. All such spirits are partial 
revelations of the one spirit of evil 
which become (so to speak) embodied 
in men. 

Comp. Doctr. App. τι οὐ πᾶς ὁ 
λαλῶν ἐν πνεύματι προφήτης ἐστίν, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐὰν ἔχῃ τοὺς τρόπους κυρίου. 

δοκιμάζετε τὰ πν.]ργοθαΐο spiritusV., 
proce the spirits. As we are charged 
to ‘prove’ the season (Luke xii. 56), 
ourselves (1 Cor. xi. 28; 2 Cor. xiii. 5), 
what is the will of God (Rom. xii. 2; 
Eph. v. 10), our work (Gal. vi. 4), our 
fellow-workers (2 Cor. viii. 8, 22; 1 
Cor. xvi. 3; 1 Tim. iii. 10), all things 
(x Thess, v. 21, notice vv. 19, 20), 80 
we are charged to ‘prove the spirits.’ 
Elsewhere the discrimination of spirits 
is referred to a special gift (1 Cor. xii. 
10 διακρίσεις πνευμάτων). Here how- 
ever the injunction to ‘prove’ them 
is given to all Christians. Comp. ii. 
zo. Man maintains his personal su- 
premacy and responsibility in the pre- 
sence of these powers: 1 Cor. xiv. 32. 

εἰ ἐκ τοῦ 6. ἐστίν] whether they are 
of God, whether they derive from Him 
their characteristic being and their 
power. 

For εἶναι ἐκ see ii. 16 note; and for 
δοκιμ. εἰ compare 2 Cor. xiii. 5; Mk. 
iii. 2; Lk. xiv. 28, 31 (Matt. xii. τὸ 
parallels). 


140 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IV. 2 


~ ες Ἅ 
ὅτι πολλοὶ ψευδοπροφῆται ἐξεληλύθασιν εἰς τὸν 


κόσμον. 


4 2 A ~ 
"Ey τούτῳ γινώσκετε TO πνεῦμα 


2 γινώσκετε NCABC me the syrhl: γινώσκεται vg syrvg: γινώσκομεν δὰ ἢ 


ὅτι π. Wevd....] Such watchful care 
is required because many false pro- 
phets, through whom the false spirits 
speak, as the Spirit speaks through 
the true prophets (2 Pet. i. 21, ii. 1), 
are gone out into the world. ‘The 
spirit of antichrist’ inspires them. So 
‘false Christs’ and ‘false prophets’ 
are joined together (Matt. xxiv. 24). 

The use of the term ψευδοπροφήτης 
in the N. T. is suggestive. It is ap- 
plied to the rivals of the true prophets 
under the old dispensation (Luke vi. 
26; 2 Pet. ii. 1); and to the rivals of 
the apostles under the new dispensa- 
tion (Matt. vii. 15, xxiv. 11,23. f. || Mk. 
xiii. 22; Acts xiii. 6); and especially, 
in the Apocalypse, to the embodied 
power of spiritual falsehood (A poe. xvi. 
13, Xix. 20, xx. 10). The false-prophet 
is not only a false-teacher (2 Pet. ii. 1 
ψευδοπροφῆται, ψευδοδιδάσκαλοι), but a 
false-teacher who supports his claims 
by manifestations of spiritual power 
(Matt. xxiv. 24 δώσουσιν σημεῖα μεγάλα 
kat τέρατα; Acts xiii. 6 ἄνδρα τινὰ 
μάγον; Apoc. xix. 20 ὁ ποιήσας τὰ 
σημεῖα). 

ἐξεληλύθασιν) exierunt V. (prodie- 
runt F.), are gone out on a mission of 
evil from their dark home. The tense, 
as contrasted with ii. 19, 2 John 7, 
ἐξῆλθαν, expresses the continuance of 
their agency as distinguished from 
the single fact of their departure. 
Comp. John viii. 42, xiii. 3, xvi. 27 &c. 

εἰς τὸν κόσμον] into the worldas the 
scene of their activity. John iii. 17, 
ix. 39, x. 36 &. 

The words evidently refer to ex- 
ternal circumstances vividly present 
to St John’s mind. They point, as it 
appears, to the great outbreak of the 
Gentile pseudo-Christianity which is 
vaguely spoken of as Gnosticism, the 


endeavour to separate the ‘ideas’ of 
the Faith from the facts of the his- 
toric Redemption. 

2. The test of spirits lies in the 
witness to the Incarnation (2, 3). 

2,3. The test of the presence of 
the Divine Spirit is the confession of 
the Incarnation, or, more exactly, of 
the Incarnate Saviour. The Gospel 
centres in a Person and not in any 
truth, even the greatest, about the 
Person. The Incarnate Saviour is 
the pledge of the complete redemption 
and perfection of man, of the restora- 
tion of ‘the body’ to its proper place 
as the perfect organ of the spirit. 
Hence the Divine Spirit must bear 
witness to Him. The test of spirits 
is found in the confession of a fact 
which vindicates the fulness of life. 
The test of antichrist was found in 
the confession of a spiritual truth (ii. 
22f.). 

2In this ye know the Spirit of God; 
every spirit which confesseth Jesus 
Christ come in flesh is of God; 3and 
every spirit which confesseth not 
Jesus is notof God. And this ts the 
spirit (revelation)of Antichrist where- 
of ye heard that it cometh ; and now 
ts it in the world already. 

2. Ἔν τούτῳ] In hoc V. (Hine F. 
Hereby. The idea of the process of 
testing passes directly into that of the 
test itself. 

γινώσκετε) cognoscitur (1.6. γινώ- 
oxeta) V., ye know, 1.6. perceive, 
recognise the presence of. The Vul- 
gate rendering is evidently derived 
from) a common itacism (-a: for -ε) and 
may be dismissed at once. Through- 
out the Epistle St John speaks per- 
sonally (ee know, ye know), and not 
in an abstract form (tt is Known). It 
is more difficult to decide whether y:- 


IV. 3] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


141 


~ θ i. ΄σ ΄ a « ΓΕ (ae ‘ , 

τοῦ θεοῦ" πᾶν πνεῦμα ὃ ὁμολογεῖ ᾿]Ιησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐν 
\ £ - a 8 4 = - 

σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν, ᾿καὶ πᾶν πνεῦμα 


ἵν Xv: XC. 


νώσκετε is indic. (ye know), or imper. 
(know ye). In every other place in 
the Epistle ἐν τούτῳ is joined with a 
direct statement. On the other hand 
it is always elsewhere used with the 
first person in combination with y- 
νώσκω (ἐν τούτῳ ὺ γινώσκομεν, ἐγνώ- 
καμεν). The change of person may 
therefore be connected with a change 
of mood; and in this case the impera- 
tive carries on the charge believe not, 
prove. Compare John xv. 18. So far 
there is nothing in usage to determine 
the question; but on the whole it 
seems more likely that St John would 
appeal to the results of actual ex- 
perience which had been hitherto de- 
cisive (ye discern, recognise) than 
seem to enjoin a new and untried 
rule (discern, recognise). Comp. Ὁ. 4. 

τὸ πν. τοῦ θ.] the Spirit of God, the 
one Holy Spirit who reveals Himself 
in many ways and in many parts. He 
must be recognised as the inspirer of 
all who speak from God; and all that 
is truly spoken is from Him. 

In v. 13 St John speaks of ‘His 
Spirit’ (2.6. of God), and in c. v. 6, ὃ 
of ‘the Spirit, but, as has been noticed, 
the title ‘the Holy Spirit’ is not found 
in the Epistles or in the Apocalypse. 
Comp. Ὁ. 6. 

πᾶν mv. &...] every spirit which... 
There is an endless variety in the 
operations of the Spirit (1 Cor. xii. 4). 
These severally appear to find cha- 
racteristic organs in ‘spirits’ which 
are capable of acting on man’s spirit. 
Comp. 1 Cor. xii. 10; Xiv. 12, 32; 
Hebr. i. 14, (xii. 9, 23), (1 Pet. iii. 19), 
(Apoc. xxii. 6); τὰ ἑπτὰ my. Apoe. i. 
4; iii. 1; iv. 5; v. 6. 

ὁμολογεῖ] consitetur V., confesseth, 
openly and boldly acknowledges the 
Person of the Incarnate Saviour and 
not only the fact of the Incarnation. 


ἐληλυθότα NAC: ἐληλυθέναι B (vg). 


Comp. ii. 23 note. The question 
here is not of inner faith, but of out- 
ward confession. Faith, if it is real, 
must declare itself. Active love must 
be connected with a distinct recogni- 
tion of its source. Ergo, Augustine 
says, followed by Bede, ipse est spiri- 
tus Dei qui dicit Jesum in carne ve- 
nisse; qui non dicit lingua sed factis ; 
qui dicit non sonando sed amando. 

*L X. ἐν σ. ἐλ] The construction of 
these words is not quite clear. Three 
ways of taking them are possible. (1) 
The direct object may be Ἰησοῦν and 
χριστὸν ἐν σ. ἐλ. a Secondary predi- 
cate: ‘confesseth Jesus as Christ and 
a Christ come in flesh’; (2) The direct 
object may be Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν and 
ἐν σ. ἔλ. a secondary predicate: ‘con- 
fesseth Jesus Christ, Him whois known 
by this full name, as come in flesh’; 
(3) The whole phrase may form a com- 
pound direct object: ‘confesseth Him, 
whose nature and work is described 
by the phrase, ‘Jesus Christ come in 
flesh’.’ The corresponding clause in 
v. 3 Ἰησοῦν which gives the person 
and not any statement about the per- 
son as the object of confession is in 
favour of the last view. 

ἐληλυθότα] The construction with 
the participle gives a different thought 
from that with the intinitive (ἐληλυ- 
déva). It does not express the ac- 
knowledgment of the truth of the fact 
but the acknowledgment of One in 
whom this fact is fulfilled and of whom 
it is predicated. Comp. 2 John 7 (ὁμολ. 
ἐρχόμενον). For the sense of ἔρχεσθαι 
see c. v. 6 note. 

ἐν σαρκὶ ἔληλ.] come in flesh, mani- 
fested under this special form. The 
order (ἐν σαρκὶ ἔλ.) and the tense of 
the verb (ἐληλ.) lay emphasis on the 
mode rather than on the fact of 
Christ’s coming. ‘The Word became 


142 


2 Lad ? ~~ = 3 »"" ἂ 
ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ἐκ τοὺ θεοῦ οὐκ ἐστιν 


3 ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ : ὃ λύει VE. See Additional Note. 
ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα δὰ syrt (lat): om. AB 


Tv Ἂν (vg) (others read τὸν Ty Xv). 
vg me the. 


flesh’ (i. 14); and that not tempo- 
rarily, but so that He is still coming 
in it (2 John 7). The Christ ‘who 
should come’ came, and coming in 
this way fulfilled and still fulfils the 
promises of the past. For the confes- 
sion is not only of One who ‘came’ 
(ἐλθόντα) but of One who ‘is come’ 
(ἐληλυθότα), whose ‘coming’ is an 
abiding fact: And yet further He 
came ‘in flesh,’ as revealing the nature 
of His mission in this form, and not 
only ‘into flesh’ (εἰς σάρκα), as simply 
entering on such a form of being. 

ἐκ τοῦ 6. ἐ] Comp. 1 Cor. xii. 3; 
and Additional Note on iii. 1. 

3. καὶ πᾶν mv.] The negative state- 
ment is here directly joined to the 
positive. In ii. 23 the positive and 
negative statements are placed in 
simple parallelism. 

ὃ μὴ dp. τὸν Ἰ] The substance of 
the confession which has been given 
in detail in the former verse is gather- 
ed up in the single human name of 
the Lord. To ‘confess Jesus,’ which 
in the connexion can only mean to 
confess ‘Jesus as Lord’ (1 Cor. xii. 3, 
Rom. x. 9), is to recognise divine 
sovereignty in One Who is truly man, 
or, in other words, to recognise the 
union of the divine and human in one 
Person, a truth which finds its only 
adequate expression in the fact of the 
Incarnation. 

The very ancient reading 6 λύει τὸν 
Ἰησοῦν (qui solvit Sesum V., qui 
destruit Lefr.: see Additional Note) 
expresses this view more directly. 
The meaning which it is designed to 
convey must be ‘which separates the 
divine from the human, which divides 
the one divine-human Person.” But 
it may well be doubted whether 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


ΠΥ. 3 
\ 
και 


τὸν ἵν AB (vg) me syrr ; 


Ἰησοῦς would be used in this compre- 
hensive sense. In Scripture ‘Jesus’ 
always emphasises the humanity of 
the Lord considered in itself. The 
thought would be conveyed by ὃ λύει 
Ἰησοῦν Χριστόν or even by ὃ λύει τὸν 
χριστόν. It seems likely that the 
verb was transferred to this context 
from some traditional saying of St 
John in which it was applied to false 
teachers, such as of λύοντες τὸν χρι- 
στόν, or the like. The words of Poly- 
carp which appear only indirectly, and 
yet certainly, to refer to the phrase 
in the Epistle indicate that St John 
dwelt upon the thought in various 
aspects: πᾶς yap ὃς ἂν μὴ ὁμολογῇ Ἰη- 
σοῦν Χριστὸν ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθέναι ἀντί- 
χριστός ἐστι, καὶ ὃς ἂν μὴ ὁμολογῇ τὸ 
μαρτύριον τοῦ σταυροῦ ἐκ τοῦ διαβόλου 
ἐστί (ad Phil. α. vii.). 

ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ] The use of μή marks 
the character of the spirit which leads 
to the denial (‘such that it confesseth 
not’) as distinguished from the simple 
fact of the failure to confess (ὃ οὐχ 
ὁμολογεῖ: Ὁ. 6 ὃς οὐκ ἔστιν). 

τὸν Ἶ.] Comp. i. 7 note. For the use 
of this simple human name of the Lord 
in similar connexions see Rom. iii. 26; 
(x. 9;) 2 Cor. xi. 4; Eph. iv. 21; Phil. 
ii. 10; Hebr. ii. 9 note. Comp. 2 Cor. 
iv. τὸ f. 

ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ é.] The denial of 
the Incarnation is in fact the denial 
of that which is characteristic of 
the Christian Faith, the true union of 
God and man (comp. ii. 22 f£). By 
this form of statement (as distin- 
guished from ‘is of the devil,’ or the 
like) St John meets the specious 
claims of the false prophets: such a 
spirit, whatever appearances may be, 
is not of God. 


IV. 4] 


~ 7 A ΄σ΄ 
τοῦτο ἐστιν τὸ τοῦ ἀντιχρίστου, 
\ ΄ cr t 
ται, καὶ νῦν ἐν τῷ KOT MW ἐστὶν 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


143 


a ΄ f ot 
ὃ ἀκηκοατε ὅτι EPXE- 


ἤδη. 4“ Ὑμεῖς 


ὃ ἀκηκ.: ὅτι ἀκηκ. &. 


The antagonists regarded here are 
not mere unbelievers but those who 
knowing Christianity fashion it into a 
shape of their own. 

Augustine (ad Joc.) remarks cha- 
racteristically that the denial of the 
Incarnation is the sign of the absence 
of love: Caritas illum addusit ad car- 
nem. Quisquis ergo non habet cari- 
tatem negat Christum in carne venisse. 
And so he goes on to interpret ‘solvit’ 
of the spirit of the schismatic: 1116 
venit colligere, tu venis solvere. Dis- 
tringere vis membra Christi. Quo- 
modo non negas Christum in carne 
venisse qui disrumpis Ecclesiam Dei 
quam 1116 congregavit? 

It is of interest to notice the two 
negative signs which St John gives of 
‘not being of God.’ In 6. iii. 10 he 
writes πᾶς ὁ μὴ ποιῶν δικαιοσύνην οὐκ 
ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ: here πᾶν πνεῦμα ὃ 
μὴ ὁμολογεῖ τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ 
ἔστιν. In the case of men the proof 
of the absence of the divine connexion 
is found in the want of active righte- 
ousness: in the case of spirits in the 
failure to confess the Incarnation. 
The two tests exactly correspond to 
one another in the two spheres to 
which they severally belong. The 
confession of the Incarnation embodied 
in life must produce the effort after 
righteousness which finds its absolute 
spiritual support in the belief in the 
Incarnation. 

καὶ rovro...] et hic est antichristus 
quod audistis V., hoc est illius anti- 
christi quod aud. F., ‘and this whole 
manifestation of false, ungodly, spiri- 
tual powers ts the manifestation of 
antichrist, whereof (6 not ὅν) ye have 
heard....’ The omission of πνεῦμα in 
the phrase τὸ τοῦ ἀντιχρίστου gives 
greater breadth to the thought, so 
that the words include the many 


spirits, the many forces, which reveal 
the action of antichrist. 

τοῦ ἀντιχρίστου] The spiritual in- 
fluence is not only negatively ‘not of 
God’: it is positively ‘of antichrist.’ 

ἀκηκόατε] Compare καθὼς ἠκούσατε 
ii. 18. The difference in tense places 
the two warnings in a somewhat dif- 
ferent relation to the hearers. For 
the perfect see ὁ. i. 1, 3, 5; for the 
aorist, ii. 7, 18, 24, iii. 11; 2 John 6. 

ἔρχεται] The same word is used of 
the advent of the power of evil as of 
the advent of the Lord. Comp. ii. 18; 
vy. 6, notes. 

καὶ νῦν...ἤδη] et nune jam V., and 
now...already. For the position of ἤδη 
see John ix. 27 (not iv. 35). The pro- 
phecy had found fulfilment before the 
Church had looked for it. 

3. The test of men lies in the re- 
cognition of the Truth (4—6). 

4—6. In the verses which precede 
(2, 3) St John has considered the 
teaching of spirits as the test of their 
character. He now regards the sub- 
ject from another point of view and 
considers the teaching of spirits as the 
test of men. 

4 Ye are of God, little children, and 
have overcome them, because greater 
ts he that is in you than he that is in 
the world. 5 They are of the world: 
Sor this cause speak they of the world 
and the world heareth them. “5 We 
are of God: he that knoweth God 
heareth us; he who is not of God 
heareth not us. By this we know 
the spirit of truth and the spirit of 
error. 

4. Ὑμεῖς] You as contrasted with 
the world; you who are in possession 
of spiritual endowments. Comp. ii. 20 
καὶ ὑμεῖς χρίσμα ἔχετε, ii. 24, 27. 

ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστέ] Comp. Addi- 
tional Note on iii. 1. 


144 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IV. 5 


cr ~ , , 4 ’ ᾽ “ « 
ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστέ, τεκνία, καὶ νενικήκατε GUTOUS, OTL 
᾽ - Nos a Ud ? A ὦ = 
μείζων ἐστὶν ὁ ἐν ὑμῖν ἢ ὁ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ" SavTOL EK TOU 


The hearers of St John have that 
divine connexion which the false 
spirits have not (v. 3 ἐκ τοῦ 8. οὐκ @.). 

rexvia] ο. iii, 18 The father in 
Christ speaks again. The address 
‘beloved’ has been used twice in the 
interval (iii. 21, iv. 1). 

νενικήκατε αὐτούς] vicistis cum V., 
cos F., have overcome them. The per- 
gonal reference goes back to τ. 1 (yev- 
δοπροφῆται). The intervening verses 
are structurally parenthetical, though 
they contain the ruling thought of the 
section. 

The false spirits, whose character- 
istic has now been defined, must have 
their organs through whom to speak ; 
and Christians must wage war against 
them. In this conflict the virtue of 
their Master’s Victory (John xvi. 33) 
is granted to them. They have to 
claim the fruits of a triumph which 
has been already gained. 

Comp. ii. 13 (νενικήκατε) note. 

The thought of a spiritual conflict 
is developed in Eph. vi. 12 ff. 

ὅτι... The ground and the assur- 
ance of the victory of Christians lie in 
the Power by which they are inspired 
(6. iii. 24). The strength of men is 
proportioned to the vital force of 
which they are the organs. 

Vicistis eum, inquit. Sed unde vi- 
cerunt?) Numquid liberi virtute ar- 
bitrii? Non utique. Taceat Pelagius, 
dicat ipse Johannes: Quoniam major 
est qui in vobis est... (Bede). So Au- 
gustine; ...qui audit Vcistis erigit 
caput, erigit cervicem, laudari se vult. 
Noli te extollere: vide quis in te 
vicit. 

μείζων] greater. See iii. 20. 

ὁ ἐν ὑμῖν) qui in vobis est V., he 
that is in you, that is in the Christian 
Society. The Church appears to be 
set over against the world; so that 
here the thought is of the body, and 


not (as in iii. 24) of the individual. 
The Divine Person is undefined. We 
think naturally of God in Christ. 
Comp. John vi. 56, xiv. 20, xv. 4 f, 
xvii. 23, 26. Elsewhere ‘the word of 
God’ (c. ii. 14), ‘the unction received 
from Him’ (ii. 27), ‘His seed’ (iii. 9) 
is said to ‘abide’ in believers, as here 
He himself is in them. See note onc. 
15. St Paul expresses the same 
thought in relation to the individual : 
Gal. ii. 20. 

ὁ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ] he that is in the 
world. ‘The many false spirits repre- 
sent one personal power of false- 
hood, ‘the prince of the world’ 
(John xii. 31, xiv. 30), the devil 
whose ‘children’ the wicked are (iii. 
10). The world occupies in regard 
to him the same twofold position 
which Christians occupy with regard 
to God: ‘the world lieth in the 
wicked one’ (c. v. 19) and he ‘is in 
the world.’ The natural opposite to 
‘in you, taken personally, would have 
been ‘in them’; but St John wishes to 
shew that these false prophets are 
representatives of the world. The 
conflict, as has been said above, is 
regarded socially. 

Comp. Eph. ii. 2. 

5. avrol...|] ipst V., they, the false 
prophets, through whom the false 
spirits work. 

The nom. pl. αὐτοί, which occurs 
here only in the Epistles, emphasises 
the contrast. Comp. James ii. 6, 7; 
Hebr. xiii. 17; Luke xi. 48. See c. ii. 
25 note. 

ἐκ τ᾿ x. εἰσίν] de mundo sunt V., 
are of the world and not simply of the 
earth (John iii. 31). The ‘earth’ ex- 
presses the necessary limitations of 
the present order: the ‘world’ the 
moral characteristics of the order, as 
separated from God. For the phrase 
compare c. ii. 16; John xv. 19, xvii. 


IV. 6] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


145 


΄ > 7 \ - ? a ,ὔ a \ 
κόσμου εἰσίν: διὰ τοῦτο ἐκ τοῦ κόσμου λαλοῦσιν Kai 


fa ΄ Ψ 
ὁ κόσμος αὐτῶν ἀκούει. 


δὴ μεῖς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐσμέν" ὁ 


ἤ \ \ , cod A / a 
γινώσκων τὸν θεὸν ἀκούει ἡμῶν, ὃς οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ TOU 


6 ὃς οὐκ.. «ἡμῶν : om, A. 


14, 16 and the cognate phrase ‘to be 
of this world’: John viii. 23, xviii. 36. 

διὰ τοῦτο] tdeo V., for this cause. 
The character of their speech and the 
character of their hearers are deter- 
mined by their own character. They 
draw the spirit and the substance of 
their teaching from (out of) the world 
and therefore it finds acceptance with 
kindred natures. The words ‘of the 
world’ answer to ‘the world’ in the 
order of the original: ‘it is of the 
world they speak, and the world 
heareth them. 

For the threefold repetition of ‘the 
world’ see John iii. 17, 31; 2 Mace. 
vii. 11. 

ἀκούει] Comp. John xv. 19. 

6. ἡμεῖς ἐκ τ. 0. ἐ] we are of God. 
The apostle has spoken of Christian 
hearers (0. 4 ὑμεῖς ἐκ τ. 6. ἐν): he now 
speaks of Christian teachers. In each 
case living dependence upon God pro- 
duces its full effect. The hearer dis- 
cerns the true message. The teacher 
discovers the true disciple. And this 
concurrence of experience brings fresh 
assurance and deeper knowledge. 

The opposition of ἡμεῖς to ὑμεῖς and 
the use of ἀκούει shew that St John is 
not speaking here of Christians gene- 
rally but of those whose work it is to 
unfold the divine message. 

The description of the true teachers 
is not exactly parallel with that of the 
false teachers. It is not directly said 
of these that ‘they speak of God’ be- 
cause the conclusion does not admit 
of being put in the same form as in 
the former case (‘they speak of the 
world and the world heareth them’). 
The world listens to those who ex- 
press its own thoughts; the Christian 
listens to those who teach him more 


W. J. 


of God, new thoughts which he makes 
his own. Thus the argument which 
in the former clause lies in ‘speak of 
the world,’ in this clause lies in ‘he 
that knoweth God.’ The readiness to 
hear springs from a living, growing, 
knowledge, which welcomes and ap- 
propriates the truth. 

Comp. John viii. 47. 

ὁ γινώσκων τ. 6.) gui novit Deum 
V., he that knoweth God. The Latin 
and English renderings both fail to 
express the force of the original 
phrase which describes a knowledge 
apprehended as progressive and not 
complete, a knowledge which answers 
to the processes of life. Comp. τ. 7, 
y. 20; John xvii. 3. Contrast ii. 3 f., 
13 ἢν iii. 1. 

So St Paul speaks of ‘the call’ of 
God as continuous; 1 Thess, v. 24. 
Comp. Phil. iii. 12 ff. 

St Johu appears to choose this most 
expressive phrase in place of the more 
general one ‘he that is of God’ in 
order to illustrate the position of the 
true disciple as one who is ever ad- 
vancing in the knowledge of God, and 
whose power of hearing and learning 
is given by this attitude of faithful 
expectancy. 

So it is that when he passes to the 
negative side it is sufficient to say ‘he 
that is not of God’ without bringing 
into prominence the special energy 
which flows from this divine de- 
pendence in regard to the fuller ex- 
position of the Gospel. 

The contrast which is marked here 
between him ‘that Anoweth God’ and 
the man ‘who is not of God’ is given 
under a slightly different form in Ὁ. 7 
where it is said ‘he that loveth hath 
been born of God and knoweth God, 


ΙΟ 


146 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IV. 6 


΄ ᾽ , - > , ΄ ‘ - 
θεοῦ οὐκ ἀκούει ἡμῶν. ἐκ τούτου γινώσκομεν τὸ πνεῦμα 
~ [ \ ‘ ~ ΄ ᾿ 
τῆς ἀληθείας καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα τῆς πλανης. 


ἐκ τούτου NB syrr: 


while ‘he that loveth not knew not 
God.’ 

οὐκ ἀκούει) Comp. John xiv. 17 
note. 

ἐκ τούτου] in hoc V. — Srom 
this. The phrase does not occur again 
in the Epistle and must be dis- 
tinguished from the common ἐν τούτῳ 
(see c. ii. 3 note). It is found twice in 
the Gospel marking a connexion partly 
historical and partly moral (vi. 66, 
xix. 12). Ἔν τούτῳ seems to note a 
fact which is a direct indication in 
itself of that which is perceived: ἐκ 
τούτου suggests some further process 
by which the conclusion is obtained. 
The consideration of the general 
character of those who receive and 
of those who reject the message, and 
again of the teaching which is re- 
ceived and rejected by those who are 
children of God, leads to a fuller dis- 
cernment of the spirit of the Truth 
and of the spirit of the opposing error. 
The power to recognise and accept 
the fuller exhibition of the Truth 
must come from the Spirit of Truth : 
the rejection of the Truth reveals the 
working of the spirit of error. 

yweokopev]) cognoscimus V.. we 
know, recognise, perceive. This power 
of recognition belongs to all believers. 
It is not limited to teachers by an 
emphatic pronoun as before; but ex- 
presses what is learnt in different 
ways by hearers and teachers. 

τὸ mv. τῆς ἀλ.] spiritum veritatis 
V., the Spirit of Truth. Comp. John 
xiv. 17 note; 1 Cor. ii. 12 ff. 

τὸ mv, τῆς πλάνης] spiritum erroris 
V., the spirit of error. The phrase is 
unique in the N. T. Comp. 1 Cor. ii. 
12 τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ κόσμου. I Tim. iv. I 
πνεύμασι πλάνοις. In contrast to ἡ 
ἀλήθεια ‘the Truth’ stands ἡ πλάνη 
(Eph. iv. 14) ‘the error,’ in which lie 


ἐν τούτῳ A vg me the. 


concentrated the germs of all manifold 


errors. Compare τὸ ψεῦδος 2 Thess. 
1. 11; Rom. i. 25; Eph. iv. 24 ἢ; 
John viii. 44. 


‘The seven spirits of error’ oc- 
cupy an important place in The 
Testaments of the XII Patriarchs, 
Reuben 2ff. The two spirits of truth 
and error are described as attending 
man, and it is added, τὸ πνεῦμα τῆς 
ἀληθείας μαρτυρεῖ πάντα καὶ “κατηγορεῖ 
πάντων, καὶ ἐμπεπύρισται ὁ ἁμαρτήσας 
ἐκ τῆς ἰδίας καρδίας. Judah, 20. 


C. Tae Cristian Lire: THE 
Victory oF Fairs. 
(iv. 7—Vv. 21.) 


The consideration of Antichrisis 
and of the spirit of Antichrist and 
error is now over, and St John, lays 
open the fulness of the Christian 
life. In doing this he takes up in a 
new connexion thoughts which he 
has before touched upon, and groups 
them in relation to the final revela- 
tion God 7s love (iv. 8, 16). 

The whole division of the Epistle 
seems to fall most naturally into 
three sections: 


I. Tae Spirit oF THE CHRISTIAN 
Lire: Gop anp Love. 
(iv. 7—21.) 
II. THe Power or roe CHRISTIAN 
Lire: THE VicToRY aND WITNESS 
or Fair. 


(v. I~12.) 

III. Tae Activiry anp CoNnFIDENCE 
oF THE CHRIsTIAN Lire: Ept- 
LOGUE. 

(Vv. 13—21.) 


I. Tae Sprriv or rae Curisrian 
Lire: Gop anp Lovs (iv. 7—21). 


This section deals in succession 
with 


IV. 7] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


147 


, 7 > id 4 
VAyanntol, ἀγαπῶμεν ἀλλήλους, ὅτι ἡ ἀγάπη ἐκ 
τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν, καὶ πᾶς ὁ ἀγαπῶν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ γεγέν- 


ἡ ὁ ἀγαπῶν: -- τὸν θεόν A (fratrem is also added). 


1. The ground of love (7—10). 
2. The of love 
(11—16 a). 


3. The activity of love (16b— 
21). 


insptration 


In the first paragraph the subject 
is regarded mainly from its abstract, 
and in the second mainly from its 
personal side: in the third it is 
treated in relation to action. 


1. The ground of love (7—10). 


The Christian Society has been 
shewn to be clearly distinguished 
from the world, even when the world 
obtains the support of spiritual pow- 
ers. St John therefore passes on to 
consider the spirit of the Christian 
life as seen in the Christian Body. 
This spirit is love, the presence of 
which is the proof of divine sonship, 
seeing that God is love (vv. 7, 8); 
and in the Incarnation we have set 
before us the manifestation (x. 9) 
and the essence of love (x. 10). 

7 Beloved, let us love one another, 
because love is of God, and every one 
that loveth is begotten of God and 
knoweth God. *%He that loveth not, 
knoweth not (knew not) God, because 
God is love. 9In this was mani- 
Sested the love of God in us, that God 
hath sent his Son, his only Son, into 
the world that we may live through 
him. In this ts love, not that we 
have loved God, but that he loved us, 
and sent his Son a propitiation for 
our sins. 

7. The transition of thought ap- 
pears to lie in the implied efficiency 
of love as a moral test of knowledge. 
The twofold commandment of faith 
and love is essentially one command- 
ment (iii. 23f.). Love in the region 
of action corresponds to the coufession 


of the Incarnation in the region of 


thought. The Christian spirit then 
is proved by love. Comp. John x. 
14 tf. note. 


᾿Αγαπητοί] The title and the charge 
go together. See ch. ii. 7 note. 

The title occurs comparatively fre- 
quently in 2 Peter, Jude, and sparingly 
in the other Epistles of the New Tes- 
tament: 2 Pet. iii 1, 8, 14, 17; 
Jude 3, 17, 20; 1 Pet. ii. 11; iv. 12; 
2 Cor. vii. 1; xii. 19; Rom. xii. 19; 
Phil. iv. 1; Hebr. vi. 9. ᾿Αγαπητοί 
μου occurs I Cor. x. 14; and ἀδελφοί 
μου ἀγαπητοί, James i. 16, 19; ii. 5 ; 
1 Cor. xv. 58. 

ἀγαπῶμεν ἀλλήλους] diligamus in- 
vicem V., let us love one another. 
Comp. ch. 111. 11 note. St John deals 
with the love of Christians for Chris- 
tians (φιλαδελφία, St Paul, Hebr., St 
Peter) as the absolute type of love. 
There is no longer any distinction of 
‘ye’ and ‘we’ (ve. 4 ff.); nor any em- 
phasis on the pronoun. Compare iii. 
14, 18, 23; iv. 12,19; v.2. St John 
never says ἀγαπᾶτε, though he does 
say μὴ ἀγαπᾶτε (ii. 15). 

Grt...] because... The charge is 
based upon a twofold argument: (1) 
Love is of God, and therefore, since it 
proceeds from Him, it must be cha- 
racteristic also of those who partake 
in His Nature, as His children; and 
again, (2) Active love becomes to 
him who exercises it the sign of his 
sonship (iii. 19). 

ἐκ τ. 6. ἐ] is of God, flows from 
Him, as the one spring, and in such 
a way that the connexion with the 
source remains unbroken. See Addi- 
tional Note on iii. 1. 

πᾶς ὁ ἀγαπῶν... every one that 
loveth... The clause appears at first 
sight to be inverted in form. It 
might have seemed to be a more 


10---Ζ 


148 


΄ \ / 
νήται καὶ γινώσκει Tov θεόν. 
\ / os © \ > , ? f 
τὸν θεόν, ὅτι 6 θεὸς ἀγάπη ἐστίν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IV. 8,9 


© “ ft 
86 μὴ ἀγαπῶν οὐκ ἔγνω 
9 ᾽ a > 

ἐν τούτῳ edave- 


* = a = , \ en > - 
ρώθη ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν ἡμῖν, ὅτι τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ 


8 ὁ μὴ ἀγ....θεόν : om. N* (om. τὸν θεὸν N°). 


οὐκ ἔγνωκεν ἴδε, 


direct argument to say ‘let us love 
one another because...every one that 
is born of God loveth.” But as it is, 
the words bring out the blessing as 
well as the implied necessity of love. 
Eyery one that loveth hath in the 
consciousness of that spirit the proof 
of his divine sonship. Comp. 6. iii. 19. 
mas 0...) every one that... Comp. 
iii. 3 note. St John does not say 
simply ‘he that loveth.’ He insists 
on the supreme characteristic of love 
as overpowering in whomsoever it is 
realised difficulties which men might 
discover in subordinate differences. 

ἐκ τοῦ 0. γεγέννηται] hath been be- 
gotten of God. Compare Additional 
Note on iii. 1. The combination of 
γεγέννηται With γινώσκει (not ἔγνωκεν) 
is significant. Living knowledge is 
regarded only in its present activity. 
The active principle of sonship is 
referred to its origin. 

γινώσκει), cognoscit V., knoweth. 
See τ. 6 note. The present is sharply 
contrasted with the aor. (έγνω, novit, 
V.) which follows (2. 8). 

The idea of ‘knowledge’ is intro- 
duced here in connexion with the ac- 
tion of the Spirit of Truth in the fuller 
unfolding of the mystery of Christ’s 
Person. He that loveth derives his 
spiritual being from God, and of 
necessity therefore is in sympathy 
with Him, and knows Him, that is, 
recognises every revelation which 
shews more of Him (6. 6). 

8. As the presence of active love 
is the pledge of advancing know- 
ledge, so the absence of love is the 
proof that apparent knowledge was 
not real. ‘He that loveth not, knew 
not God? (οὐκ ἔγνω τ. 6., non novit V., 


οὐκ ἔγνω: οὐ γινώσκει A: 


ignorat F.) when he made profession 
of knowing Him. His acknowledg- 
ment of God (as at Baptism) was 
based on no true recognition of His 
nature. 

The aor. (ἔγνων) always has its full 
force. Compare iii. 1; John x. 38, 
xvi. 3. 

ὅτι...1 because. It is assumed that 
knowledge involves practical sym- 
pathy. Compare ii. 3 note. 

Bede puts well one side of the 
truth; Quisquis [Deum] non amat, 
profecto ostendit quia quam sit ama- 
bilis non novit (ad c. ii. 5). 

This conception of the nature of 
knowledge corresponds with the view 
of the Gospel as ‘the Truth.’ 

ὁ 0. ἀγάπη ἐστίν] Deus caritas est 
V. See Additional Note. 

9. ἐν τούτῳ... «ὅτι... In hoc...quo- 
niam... V. Inthis...that... Sov. το, 
John ix, 30. 

ἐν τ. ἐφαν....1 The manifestation and 
the essence of love (v. Io ἐν τ. ἐστὶν 
ἡ a.) are distinguished, though both 
are seen in the Incarnation. The 
manifestation of love was shewn in 
the fact (τ. vi. τ. μον. ἀπέστ.) and in 
the end (iva ζήσ.) of the Mission of 
the Son. The essence of love was 
shewn in this that the Mission of the 
Son was absolutely spontaneous (av- 
τὸς ἠγάπησεν 7.). Comp. Rom. viii. 32. 

epavepdOnlapparuit V.manifestata 
est Aug., was manifested. That which 
‘was’ eternally was made known in 
time. Compare c. i. 2 note. In the 
retrospect of His completed work on 
earth the Lord says: ἐφανέρωσά σου 
τὸ ὄνομα (John xvii. 6), that is ‘the 
Father’s name,’ the revelation of love. 
See also 2 Tim. i. 9 ἢ 


IV. 10] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


149 


‘ “-“ > 4 © A > \ μὲ .“ 
TOV μονογενῆ ἀπέσταλκεν ὁ θεὸς εἰς τὸν κόσμον ἵνα 


, Υ ὰ χὰ 
ζήσωμεν δι’ αὐτοῦ. 
9 ζήσωμεν : ζῶμεν δὲ", 


ἐν ἡμῖν) in nobis V., in us: not 
simply ‘towards us’ as the objects 
to whom the love was directed, but 
‘in us, in us believers, as the me- 
dium in which it was revealed and 
in which it was effective (that we 
may live through Him). Comp. τ. 
16. The Christian shares the life of 
Christ, and so becomes himself a 
secondary sign of God’s love. There 
is a sense in which creation shews 
God’s love, but this revelation be- 
comes clear through the new crea- 
tion. The manifestation of the love 
of God to man becomes a living power 
as a manifestation of His love im man. 

The sense in our case, or among 
us (John i. 14),is excluded by the con- 
stant use of the preposition in the 
context to express the presence of 
God in the Christian body (v. 12). 

τὸν υἱὸν av. τὸν pov.) filium suum 
unigenitum V., His Son, His only 
Son. The exact form occurs only here 
and Johniii. 16. Comp. ii 7; John i. 
14 notes; and Additional Note on iii. 
23. The order of the words in the 
whole clause is most impressive: ‘in 
this that His Son, His only Son, hath 
God sent into the world,’ into the 
world, though alienated from Him. 

ἀπέσταλκεν] He hath sent, and we 
now enjoy the blessings of the Mission: 
Ὁ. 14; John y. 36, xx. 21. Comp. 
John ν. 33; Luke iv. 18; 2 Cor. xii. 
17, ἄς, The aorist (ἀπέστειλα) oc- 
curs v.10; John iii. 17, 34, vi. 29, &c., 
xvii. 3, &c. See Additional Notes on 
iii, 5; John xx. 21. 

Both here and in John iii. 16 the 
Mission of the Son is referred to 
‘God’ and not to ‘the Father.’ The 
central idea is that of the divine 
majesty of the Son and not that of 
the special relation in which the 


το ἐν ΄ 2 \ « ᾽ , ᾽ 
TOUTW εστίν ἢ ayamTrn, ουχ 


10 ἡ ἀγ.: -τοῦ θεοῦ δὰ me the. 


Father stands to the Son and, through 
the Son, to men. Contrast Ὁ. 14, and 
see Additional Note on i. 2. 

ἵνα ζήσωμεν... that we may live... 
The natural state of men is that of 
death: c. iii 14. It is perhaps strange 
that this is the only place in the 
Epistles in which the verb ζῆν occurs. 
Compare John v. 25; Vi. 51, 57 f.; 
xi. 25; xiv. 19. The term is used 
because the Apostle lays stress upon 
the activity of the Christian and not 
upon his safety only (that we may be 
saved: Johniii. 17. In him, as he 
lives, the love of God is seen visibly 
working. As compared with John 
iii. 16 f, which should be closely 
examined with this passage, the ob- 
ject of the Mission of Christ is here 
set forth in its personal working and 
not in its general scope. 

OC αὐτοῦ] per eum V., through 
Him, as the efficient cause of life. 

Elsewhere the Christian is said to 
live ‘on account of’ Christ; John vi. 
57 (δὲ ἐμῶ). 

St Paul speaks of Christ as living 
in the Christian; Gal. ii. 20. ‘The 
life of Jesus’ is that which the be- 
liever strives to manifest: 2 Cor. iv. 
1of.; and Christ is his life: Col. iii. 
4 (comp. 1 John v. 12, 20); while 
hereafter the Christian will live with 
Him (σὺν αὐτῷ): 1 Thess. v. το. So 
Christ is the aim of the Christian’s 
life: Rom. xiv. 8 (τῷ κυρίῳ ¢.); comp. 
Rom. vi. 1of.; Gal. ii. 19; and the 
substance of his life (τὸ ζῆν): Phil 
i. 21. 

Itisto be noticed that the Christian 
is not said in the New Testament to 
‘live in Christ’ (contrast Acts xvii. 
28): though the .Christian’s life is 
‘in Him’: 1 John v. 11; Rom. vi. 23; 
2 Tim. i. 1. This phrase however 


150 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IV. 1 


- ‘ U / >A > , 

ὅτι ἡμεῖς ἠγαπήκαμεν Tov θεὸν, ἀλλ᾽ OTL αὐτὸς Hya- 
— τ᾿ / \ AN 2 hid Ξε \ 

πησεν ἡμᾶς καὶ ἀπέστειλεν τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ ἰλασμον 


περὶ τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν ἡμῶν. 


4 ? 
τ λγαπητοί, εἰ 


© 2 © ΝΑ € ~ 4 Σ ἡ 
οὕτως 6 θεὸς ἠγάπησεν ἡμᾶς, καὶ ἡμεῖς ὀφείλομεν ἀλλή- 


ἠγαπήσαμεν NA (ἠγάπησεν N*): ἠγαπήκαμεν Β. 


ἀπέστειλεν: ἁπέσταλκεν &. 


occurs in Polyc. ad Phil. 8, δι’ ἡμᾶς, 
iva ζήσωμεν ἐν αὐτῷ, πάντα ὑπέμεινε. 

10. ἐν τούτῳ ἐστίν...ὅτι...} in this 
is...that... In this we can see a 
revelation of the true nature of love. 
The source of love is the free will of 
God Himself. He loved us because 
‘He is love,’ and in virtue of that love 
sent His Son. The origin of love lies 
beyond humanity. 

ἡ ἀγάπη) caritas V., lore, in its 
most absolute sense, not farther de- 
fined as the love of God or of man. 

οὐχ ὅτι... ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι...1 non guast...sed 
quoniam V., not that...but that... 
The negative clause is brought for- 
ward to emphasise the thought of 
man’s inability to originate love. For 
somewhat similar forms of expression 
see 2 John 5; John vi. 38; vii. 22; 
xii. 6. Non illum dileximus prius: 
nam ad hoc nos dilexit ut diligamus 
eum (Aug., Bede). 

αὐτός] ipse V., He, of His own free 
will. Compare ii. 25 note. 

ἠγάπησεν] loced us. The love is 
viewed in regard to its historic mani- 
festation, John iii. 16; Eph. ii. 4; 
2 Thess. ii. 16. Comp. Gal. ii. 20; 
Eph. v. 2, 25; Apoc. iii. 9. 

ἱλασμόν] propitiationem V., litato- 
rem Aug. ; in quibusdam codicibus... 
legitur...ditatorem... Bede; expiatorem 
Lefr., a propitiation. Comp. ii. 2 note. 
The idea is introduced here to mark 
the preparation of men for fellowship 
with God. God was pleased to make 
men fit to share His nature. The life 
(e. 9) followed on the removal of sin. 


2. The inspiration of love (11—16a). 
St John has shewn that love must 


αὐτός : ἐκεῖνος A. 


come from God Who has revealed in 
the Incarnation what it is essentially, 
the spontaneous communication of the 
highest good. He now considers what 
must be the effect upon men of this 
manifestation of love, which is the 
assurance and the revelation of the 
Divine Presence. 

The character of God’s love carries 
with it an obligation to love (Ὁ. 11) 
through the fulfilment of which by 
the Spirit we gain the highest possible 
assurance of fellowship with God (ez. 
12, 13). And the experience of the 
Church attests equally the love of 
God and the effects of His love 
among men (14—16 @). 

™ Beloved, if God so loved us, we 
also ought to love one another. ΝΟ 
man hath ever yet beheld God: if we 
love one another, God abideth in us 
and his love ts perfected in us. %3In 
this we know that we abide in him 
and he in us, because he hath given 
us of his Spirit. ™ And we have 
beheld and bear witness that the 
Father hath sent the Son as Saviour 
of the world. Whosoever shall 
confess that Jesus [Christ] is the Son 
of God, God abideth in him and he 
in God. * And we know and have 
believed the love which Gud hath in us. 

Il. ᾿Αγαπητοί] v. 7 note. 

el οὕτως...] st sic Deus dilexit nos, 
if it was so, as we see in the mission 
of His Son, God loved us.... The 
order of the words throws a stress 
upon the particular manifestation of 
God’s love (ἠγάπησεν, John iii. 16); 
and the repetition of ὁ θεός empha- 
sises the Majesty of Him Who thus 
revealed His love. 


IV. 12] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


151 


~ A x 
Aous ayarav. “θεὸν οὐδεὶς πώποτε τεθέαται: ἐὰν ἀγα- 
αἷς. ’ ca \ ~ > = 
πῶμεν ἀλλήλους, ὁ θεὸς ἐν ἡμῖν μένει καὶ ἡ ἀγάπη αὐτοῦ 


καὶ ἡ. ὀφ.} et nos debemus V., we 
also ought... Seeiii. 16 note. The love 
which God has not only shewn but 
given to us (συ. 1) becomes a con- 
straining motive for action. 

ἀλλ. ay.] alterutrum diligere V., 
invicem diligere Aug. (F.). The 
phrase marks the mutual fulness of 
love. Comp. iii. 11 note. Of the love 
itself Augustine says: Noli in homine 
amare errorem, sed hominem: homi- 
nem enim Deus fecit, errorem ipse 
homo fecit. 

It is of importance to observe that 
the obligation which St John draws 
from the fact of God’s love is not that 
we should ‘love God’ but that we 
should ‘love one another.” It is 
through human affections and duties 
that the spiritual, when once appre- 
hended in its sublime purity, gains 
definiteness and reality under the 
conditions of our present state (comp. 
v. 20; 6. i. 3 note). The thought of 
‘the love of God’ (ae. of which God 
is the object) as distinct from the 
‘love of Christ’ (John xiv. 15, 21, 23 f., 
28; xxi. 16; Eph. vi. 24) is very rare 
in the N. T. (. 21; c. v.2; Rom. viii. 
28; 1 Cor. ii. 9, Lxx.; viii. 3 εἴ τις 
ἀγαπᾷ τὸν θεόν, οὗτος ἔγνωσται ὑπ᾽ αὐ- 
τοῦ). The command to love God is 
quoted from the Law (Matt. xxii. 37 
and parr. from Deut. vi. 5). Gradu- 
ally by the elevation of thought God 
seemed to be withdrawn from.men; 
and then in the Person of His Son, 
who took humanity to Himself, God 
gave back to man that in which 
human feeling can find inspiration 
and rest. 

12. θεόν... τεθέαται] Deum nemo 
vidit unquam V., God hath no man 
ever beheld. Comp. John i: 18 note. In 
both passages θεόν stands first and 
without the article, ‘God as God’; 
and in both passages the object is 


directly followed by the subject: God 
hath no man ever (seen). But the 
verbs are different. In John 1. 18 
the thought is of the vision which 
might be the foundation of revelation 
(ἑώρακεν) : here the thought is of the 
continuous beholding which answers to 
abiding fellowship (τεθέαται). Comp. 
John xvi. 16 note. On θεός and ὁ 
θεός see Additional Note. 

οὐδεὶς mamore...] no man ever yet... 
In these words St John seems to call 
up all the triumphs of the saints in 
past time. However close their fel- 
lowship with God had been, yet no 
one had beheld Him as Heis, The 
question here is not one of abstract 
power but of actual experience. 

ἐὰν ἀγαπῶμεν... if we love...... 
Though God is invisible He yet is not 
only very near to us but may be in 
us, the Life of our lives. The words, 
as Bede points out, meet the implied 
question: Quo solatio utendum ubi 
divina visione nondum licet perfrui? 

The manifestation of active love by 
men witnesses to two facts: (1) the 
abiding of God in them, and (2) the. 
presence of divine love in them in its 
completest form. There is both the 
reality of fellowship and the effective- 
ness of fellowship. 

6 θ. ἐν ἡμ. μένει) abideth in us. See 
Additional Note on v.15. Generally 
this fellowship is described under its 
two aspects (‘God in us, we in God’), 
but here the idea is that of the power 
of the divine indwelling. Comp. John 
xvii. 23, 26. 

The question has been asked (Bede), 
How the highest blessedness is at- 
tached to ‘the mutual love of Chris- 
tians while in the Gospel the love of 
enemies ig enjoined (Matt. v. 43 ff.)? 
The answer lies in the recognition of 
the essence of Christian love. This 
resting upon the Incarnation regards 


152 


> - 2 / 
τετελειωμένη ἐν ἡμῖν ἐστιν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


{IV. 13 


> , , 
Séy τούτῳ γινωσκομεν 


iat \ \ - df 7 -~ 
ὅτι ἐν αὐτῷ μένομεν Kal αὐτὸς ἐν ἡμῖν, OTL ἐκ τοῦ 
ἐ 


12 Ter. ἐν ἡμῖν ἐ. NB: ἐν ἡμῖν rer. ἐ. A vg: Ter. ἐ. ἐν ἡμῖν me the syrr. 


all men in the light of that fact. The 
Christian can separate in man that 
which belongs to his true nature from 
the disease which corrupts it: Szevit 
in te homo. 1116 szevit, tu deprecare: 
ille odit, tu miserere. Febris anime 
ipsius te odit: sanus erit et gratias 
tibi aget (Aug. in 1 Joh. Tract. viii. 
ὃ 11). 

The love of the brethren is indeed 
the recognition of God in men by the 
exercise of that in man which is after 
the image of God. Ubi factus est ad 
imaginem Dei? Augustine asks on 
this passage, and replies: In intel- 
lectu, in mente, in interiore homine, 
in ev quod intellegit caritatem, diju- 
dicat justitiam et injustitiam, novit a 
quo factus est, potest intellegere Crea- 
torem suum, laudare Creatorem suum 
(Tract. viii. § 6). 

He afterwards adds a profound 
test of love: Hoc naturale habes: 
semper melior eris quam bestia. Si 
vis melior esse quam alius homo, in- 
videbis ei quando tibi esse videbis 
zequalem. Debes velle omnes homi- 
nes zequales tibi esse (§ 8.) 

ἡ ay. αὐτοῦ] caritas ejus V., His 
love, the love which answers to His 
nature and with which He has en- 
dowed us. Comp. ii. 5 note. Man 
receives the love of God and makes it 
his own. Neither of the two speci- 
ally defined senses, ‘the love of God 
for man,’ or ‘the love of man for 
God,’ suits the context. 

τετελ....«ἐστίν]ἠ The resolved form 
(i. 4; contrast v. 17, ii. 5) emphasises 
the two elements of the thought: 
‘the love of God is in us’; ‘the love 
of God is in us in its completest 
form.’ It is through man that ‘the 
love of God’ finds its fulfilment on 
earth. 

The ideas of the perfection of love 


in the believer and of the perfection 
of the believer in love are presented 
in several different forms in the 
epistle. In c¢. ii. 5 the sign of the 
perfection of ‘the love of Gud’ in man 
is found in the watchful regard which 
the believer pays to His revelation 
(ὃς ἂν τηρῇ αὐτοῦ τὸν λόγον). Here it 
is found in the love of Christians for 
one another. The two signs explain 
and indeed include each other. Love 
is the fulfilment of divine obedience. 
The commandment of Christ was 
love (ef. ¢. iii. 23). 

In vv. 17, 18 the perfection of love 
is nresented under another aspect. 
The fruit of the possession of ‘love’ 
is shewn in regard to the believer 
himself. ‘Love hath been perfected 
with us’ to the end that ‘we may 
have boldness in the day of judg- 
ment.’ And for the present, ‘he that 
feareth hath not been made perfect 
in love.’ Obedience, active love, con- 
fidence, these three, point to the 
same fact. Where the one is the 
other is. The source of all is the full 
development of the divine gift of 
love. 

This characteristic thought of St 
John is found in the Thanksgiving 
after the Eucharist in the Doctr. App. 
10 Μνήσθητι, Κύριε, τῆς ἐκκλησίας σου 
τοῦ.. τελειῶσαι αὐτὴν ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ 
σου... 
13. ἐν τούτῳ γινώσκομεν. ..] in hoc 
intellegimus V., in this, the posses- 
sion of the spirit of love, which flows 
from God, we perceive, we are seve- 
rally conscious of the fact of the 
divine indwelling which has been 
affirmed generally (2. 12, God abideth 
in us); and that by continuous and 
progressive experience (contrast ἐγνώ- 
καμεν, Ὁ. 16). 

ἐν αὐτῶ μένομεν... See Additional 


IV. 14, 15] 


, a“ Gl - 
πνεύματος αὐτοῦ δέδωκεν ἡμῖν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


153 


14 Καὶ ἡμεῖς τεθεάμεθα 


\ ΄“ «“ἶ \ t 4 eN 
Kal μαρτυρουμεν οτι ὁ TaTHO ἀπεσταλκεν τον υἱον 


ἀμ 2 t 
σωτῆρα TOV κοσμου. 


13 δέδωκεν NB: ἔδωκεν A. 
15 ὁμολογήσῃ: ὁμολογῇ A. 


Note on v. 15. The believer feels 
in the enjoyment of this affection that 
the centre of his life is no longer 
within himself nor on earth; because 
the spirit by which it is inspired, by 
which alone it can be inspired, is the 
Spirit of God. 

ἐκ τοῦ πν.} de spiritu suo V., of 
His Spirit, ‘to each according to his 
several ability.’ Under different as- 
pects it can be said that God gives to 
Christians ‘His Spirit’ (1 Thess. iv. 
8), or ‘of His Spirit. For the use of 
ἐκ (contrast 111. 24) see John vi. 11, i. 
16. In the Holy Trinity we conceive 
of the perfect union of the Father 
and the Son as realised through the 
Spirit. So too it is through the same 
Spirit that the ‘many sons’ are united 
in the Son with God. 

δέδωκεν) hath given. Contrast iii. 
24, ἔδωκεν. The difference in tense 
corresponds to the difference in the 
sense of ἐκ τοῦ πνεύματος. 

14. Καὶ ἡμεῖς τεθ....1 ΕἸ nos vidi- 
mus V., And we have beheld... The 
emphatic pronoun (e. 6, i. 4; John i. 
16) brings into prominence the ex- 
perience of the Christian Society 
gathered up in that of its leaders. 
The apostle does not speak of himself 
personally but as representing the 
Church for which he had a special 
work to do. His experience (John i. 
14) was in another form the experi- 
ence of all (John i. 16). The vision 
and witness of the immediate dis- 
ciples correspond with the know- 
ledge and belief of the disciples in all 
ages. Or, to express the same truth 
otherwise, that vision and witness 
remain as an abiding endowment of 
the living Body. 


15 A aA © Xr , «“ Ἴ "Ἐς 
ὃς ἐαν ὁμολογησὴ ὅτι ἰησους 


14 τεθεάμεθα NB: ἐθεασάμεθα A. 
Ἰησοῦς : - Χριστός Β. 


τεθεάμεθα] Strictly speaking the 
immediate objects of τεθεάμεθα and 
μαρτυροῦμεν are different. The object 
of contemplation was the revelation 
of the Lord’s Life: the object of 
witness, the declaration of its mean- 
ing. In a wider sense spiritual facts 
can become the objects of direct 
vision (comp. John i. 33, μένον). Here 
however the thought is that the sig- 
nificance of the Lord’s Mission was 
made known to those who carefully 
regarded His Life and observed the 
necessary tendency of all His actions. 
In this respect His Life was the ob- 
ject of contemplation (θεᾶσθαι) and 
not of vision. Compare John i. 34 
(ἑώρακα) with John i. 32 (τεθέαμαι). 
See also c. i. 1, 2. 

The use of τεθεάμεθα carries the 
mind back to Ὁ. 12, θεὸν οὐδεὶς τεθέα- 
ται. Though God Himself had not 
been the object of direct human re- 
gard, yet Christian faith rests upon a 
historic revelation of His Nature. 

τεθεάμεθα καὶ μαρτυροῦμεν] Comp. 
i. 2, ἑωράκαμεν καὶ μαρτυροῦμεν, iii. 11, 
32, and contrast John i. 34, ἑώρακα καὶ 
μεμαρτύρηκα, xix. 35. The continuous 
witness was based upon the abiding 
experience. 

ὁ πατήρ] Comp. Ὁ. 10 (ὁ θεός) note. 

ἀπέσταλκεν) hath sent. The testi- 
mony is borne not simply to the his- 
toric fact (Ὁ. 10, ἀπέστειλεν), but (as 
in v. 9) to the permanence of Christ’s 
mission. Of this believers have direct 
knowledge. Comp. Additional Note 
on 6. fii. 5. 

σωτῆρα τοῦ «.] salvatorem mundi 
V. (seculi F.), as Saviour of the 
world, The full title occurs once 
again in the N. T. as the confession 


[54 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IV. 16 


[Χριστός] ἐστιν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ, ὁ θεὸς ἐν αὐτῷ 


a 4 3 Ἧ, ᾽ lol 6 ΄σ 
μένει καὶ @uTOS ἐν Tw εω. 


of the Samaritans, John iv. 42; and 
the thought which it conveys is ex- 
pressed in John iii. 17. St John 
nowhere else uses the title σωτήρ, 
which in other apostolic writings is 
applied both (1) to ‘God’: 1 Tim. i. 
I θεὸς σωτὴρ ἡμῶν καὶ X. 71; Tit. i 3 
ὁ σ- ἡμῶν 6. ii, το, iii, 4; Jude 25 
μόνος θεὸς σωτήρ; and more expressly 
1 Tim. ii. 3 ὁ σ. 9. 6. ὃς πάντας ἀνθρώ- 
mous θέλει σωθῆναι, iv. 10 θεὸς ζῶν, 
ὅς ἐστιν σωτὴρ πάντων ἀνθρώπων, μά- 
λιστα πιστῶν (comp. Luke i. 47); and 
(2) to Christ: Luke ii. 11 ἐτέχθη ὑμῖν 
σ. ὅς ἐστιν χριστὸς κύριος; Acts Vv. 31 
[Ἰησοῦν] ὁ θεὸς ἀρχηγὸν καὶ σωτῆρα 
ὕψωσεν, xiii. 23 ὁ θεός.. ἤγαγεν τῷ Ἴσ- 
ραὴλ σωτῆρα Ἰησοῦν; 2 Tim. 1. τὸ ὃ σ. 
ἡ. XL; Lit. 1..4 Χ. Ἶ. ὁ σ. ἧ. (comp. 
Ὁ. 3), li, 13 ὁ μέγας θεὸς καὶ σ. ἡ. Χ. Ἶ., 
iii. 6 LX. ὁ σ. ἡ.; 2 Pet. i. 11 ὁ κύριος 
7. καὶ σ. Ἴ. X., ii, 20, iii. 18 (comp. iii. 
2 ὁ «. καὶ o.); and more particularly 
Phil. iii. 20 σ. ἀπεκδεχόμεθα κύριον "I. 
X. (Eph. v. 23 αὐτὸς σωτὴρ τοῦ σώμα- 
ros is doubtful). Thus the title is 
confined (with the exception of the 
writings of St Luke) to the later writ- 
ings of the N. T., and is not found in 
the central group of St Paul’s Epi- 
stles. The double application in Tit. 
i. 3 f. is very instructive. 

The title is applied to God not un- 
frequently in the Lxx.: Deut. xxxii. 
15 θεὸς σ. (INVYY WS a Deo salutari 
V.); Ps. xxiv. (xxiii.) 5; xxv. (xxiv.) 5 
(Deussalvator meus V.) ; xxvii. (xxvi.)9 
(py? “TN Deus salutaris meus V.) ; 
Ixv. (Ixiv.) 6; Ixxix. (Ixxviii.) 9; xev. 
(xciv.) 1|| Deut. xxxii. 15; Is. xvii. 10; 
xlv. 15 (WWD salvator V.). Comp. 
Wisd. xvi. 7; Ecclus. li. 1; 1 Mace. iv. 
30. It is used also of human deliver- 
ers: Jud. iii. 9, 15 (PWD salvator V.); 
and of the promised salvation (Sa- 
viour): Is, Ixii, rr (WY salvator V.). 


- 2 ΄ 
Kai ἡμεῖς ἐγνώκαμεν 


In Classical writers the title is used 
of many deities, especially of Zeus; 
and it was given under later Greek 
dynasties to princes and benefactors. 
Comp. Pearson On the Creed, pp. 72 f. 
(136 ff.) notes, and Wetstein on Lk. 
ii. 11 for numerous examples. [0 
had no Latin equivalent in Cicero’s 
time. Cicero commenting on the title 
as applied to Verres adds: Hoc quan- 
tum est? ita magnum est ut Latine 
uno verbo exprimi non possit. Is est 
nimirum soter qui salutem dat (in 
Verr. ii. 2, 63). 

The accus. (σωτῆρα) describes what 
Christ is and not simply what He is 
designed to be. Compare ii. 2 ἱλασμός 
ἐστιν, Ὁ. 10 ἀπέστειλεν ἱλασμόν. That 
which is yet partly future in its human 
application (Phil. iii. 20 σωτῆρα ἀπεκδε- 
χόμεθα) is complete in the divine idea. 

Itis worthy of notice that the words 
σώζειν and σωτηρία are not found in 
the Epistles of St John. 

15. ds ἐάν] See ii. 5 note. There 
is no limitation in the will of God 
(1 Tim. ii. 3). 

ὁμολογήσῃ] See ii 23 note; τ. 2 
note. The different forms of the con- 
fession require to be studied together. 
He that confesseth the Son hath the 
Father also (ii. 23); Every spirit 
that confesseth Jesus Christ come in 
the flesh is of God (iv. 2); Whosoever 
confesseth that Jesus [Christ] is the 
Son of God, God abideth in him and 
he in God. The exact point of the 
confession here prepares for the con- 
clusion. The recognition of the reve- 
lation of God is the sign of the pre- 
sence of God (comp. 1 Cor. xii. 3). 
The fruit of the confession character- 
ised in Ὁ. 2 is now described fully. 

Ἰησοῦς...ὁ vids rod θ.] Comp. Hebr. 
iv. 14 note; and ο. iii. 8 note. 

ὁ 6. ἐν αὐ... αὐ. ἐν τῷ 6.)God in him 
...he in God. See Additional Note. 


IV. 16] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


155 


* if ‘ fa εἰ ΩΣ « * 
καὶ πεπιστεύκαμεν THY ἀγαπην ἣν ἔχει ὁ θεὸς ἐν 


16 πεπιστεύκαμεν NB (vg): πιστεύομεν A me. 


The two clauses mark two aspects 
of the Christian’s life. The believer 
has a new and invincible power for 
the fulfilment of his work on earth: 
‘God is in him’ And again he real- 
1568 that his life is not on earth, that 
he belongs essentially to another order: 
‘he is in God.’ The divine fellowship 
is complete and effective in each di- 
rection. 

This complementary view of the 
fulness of the Christian life, as the 
believer lives in God and God in him, 
is presented by St John in several 
forms. The love of God abideth in 
him (iii. 17), and he abideth in love 
(iv. 16). Eternal life abides in him 
(iii, 15); and this life is in the Son 
of God (v.11). The Truth is in him 
(i. 8; ii, 4), and he walketh in the 
Truth (2 Ep. 3). The word of God 
is and abideth in him (i. το; 11. 14; 
cf. ii. 24), and he abides in the word 
(John viii. 31). He is and abides in 
the light (ii. 9 ἢ), and the unction of 
God abides in him (ii. 27), and guides 
him to all the Truth. Comp. Apoc. 
iii, 20. 

Vicissim in se habitant qui continet 
et qui continetur. Habitas in Deo, 
sed ut continearis: habitat in te 
Deus, sed ut te contineat ne cadas 
(Aug., Bede). 

16. Καὶ ἡμεῖς] And we, we who can 
speak from the fulness of Christian 
experience as confessors of Christ... 
The case is taken from supposition 
(és ἐὰν) to fact. For ἡμεῖς see Ὁ. 14 
note. 

ἐγνώκ. καὶ πεπιστ. τὴν ἀγ.] cognovi- 
mus et credidimus caritati V., cogn. 
et credimus quam dilectionem Deus 
habet Aug., cogn. et credidimus in 
[caritate] quam habet Deus F. The 
two verbs form a compound verb, in 
which the idea of belief qualifies and 
explains what is in this case the pri- 
mary and predominant idea, know- 


ὁ θεός : —O δ. 


ledge. The Vulgate rendering throws 
the emphasis wrongly on belief. The 
same two verbs occur in John vi. 69 
in the reverse order: ἡμεῖς πεπιστεύ- 
καμεν καὶ ἐγνώκαμεν ὅτι σὺ εἶ ὁ ἅγιος 
τοῦ θεοῦ. Under different aspects 
knowledge precedes faith and. faith 
precedes knowledge. We must have 
a true if limited knowledge of the 
object of faith before true faith can 
exist; and true faith opens the way 
to fuller knowledge. A general faith 
in Christ and self-surrender to Him 
prepared the disciples for a loftier 
apprehension of His character. The 
actual experience of love includes the 
promise of a larger manifestation of 
its treasures. This St John indicates 
here: ‘We have perceived the divine 
love. To a certain extent we have 
realised what it is: but we have not 
exhausted its meaning. In knowing 
we have believed too; and in the 
conscious imperfection of knowledge 
we wait without doubt for future re- 
velation.’ 

τὴν ay. ἣν ἔχει 6 θ. ἐν ἡμῖν] For the 
phrase ἀγάπ. ἔχειν see John xiii. 35 
ἐὰν dy. ἔχητε ἐν ἀλλήλοις; John xv. 
13; I Pet. iv. ὃ τὴν εἰς ἑαυτοὺς ay, 
éxrevy ἔχοντες; 1 Cor. xiii. 1 ff; Phil. 
ii. 2. It is clear from the context 
that the love here spoken of is the 
love which God has and shews to- 
wards man. But St John adds a 
second thought to that of God’s love 
towards man (εἰς ἡμᾶς). The love of 
God becomes a power in the Chris- 
tian Body (ἐν ἡμῖν. Believers are 
the sphere in which it operates and 
makes itself felt in the world (2 Cor. 
iv. 10 f.). Comp. 2. 9 note. 


3. The activity of love (16b6—21). 


In the two preceding sections St 
John has shewn what love is in its 
essence and origin, and how it neces- 


136 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


ἡμῖν. 


[IV. 16 


# ’ὔ ‘ e ἃ > 
‘O θεὸς ἀγάπη ἐστίν, καὶ ὁ μένων ἐν 


a n - , \ ‘ ee , 
τῇ ἀγάπη ἐν TO θεῴ μένει Kal ὁ θεὸς ἐν αὐτῷ [μένει]. 
‘ « 


ἐν αὐτῷ μένει NB me the syrhl: -- μένει A vg. 


sarily becomes an inspiring power in 
the believer, answering to a confession 
of the Incarnation. He now developes 
more fully the activity of love; and 
this in two relations, as to the be- 
liever in himself (τό b—18), and as 
to the believer in his dealings with his 
fellow-Christians (19—21). On the 
one side, it is by continuance in love 
that the divine fellowship is realised 
by the believer (16 ὃ), while love is 
perfected in the divine fellowship, so 
that the last element of fear is cast 
ont of the soul of him who loves (17, 
18). And on the other side love, 
which is of a divine vrigin (19), must 
be fulfilled after a divine type, in love 
to the brethren (20), according to the 
divine commandment (21). 

Ambrose has traced in a famous 
passage the progress of love till it 
tinds its consummation in complete 
self-surrender. This he sees shadowed 
out in three passages of Canticles (ii. 
16 ἢ; vi. 2; vii. ro). First there is 
the quickening of the divine affection 
in the soul by the revelation of the 
Word; next, the freedom of mutual 
intercourse between the soul and the 
Word; and at last the soul offers 
itself absolutely to the Word that He 
may rest there (Ambr. de Isaac et 
anima, ὁ. viii. § 68). 

God is love, and he that abideth in 
love abideth in God and God [abideth] 
in him. 17 In this love is perfected 
with us, that we may have boldness in 
the day of judgment; because even 
as he is, so are we in the world. 
18. There is no fear in love, but per- 
Sect love casteth out fear, because fear 
hath punishment; and he that fear- 
eth is not perfected in love. 

The words of v. 8 God is love 
are repeated as the subject of a new 


development of thought. Before the 
idea was of birth and knowledge, now 
the idea is of growth and action. 
The revelation of the Nature of God 
as love calls out a response in answer 
to that which is necessarily regarded 
as a ‘personal’ call to men, and by 
suggesting the idea of unlimited self- 
communication as characteristic of 
God, it sets a type for human action. 
The nature of the believer must be 
conformed to the Nature of God. 

καὶ ὁ μένων... and he that abideth 

From the very Nature of God it 
follows as a necessary consequence 
that the life of self-devotion is ἃ life 
in fellowship with Him. By the use 
of the conjunction in place of simple 
parallelism (he that abideth) the 
unity of the complex idea is empha- 
sised, 

ὁ μένων ἐν τῇ ἀγ.] he that abideth 
in love as the sphere in which his 
life is fulfilled. Compare John xv. 
Of. μ. ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ τῇ ἐμῇ, uw. ἐν τῇ ay. 
μου. Here the feeling is regarded 
absolutely without any further defi- 
nition of its object, as God or man. 
But the divine ideal made known 
through Christ is present to the mind 
of writer and reader. 

Under different aspects St John 
presents elsewhere ‘the light’ (c. ii. 
10), and ‘the word’ (John viii. 31), 
as the sphere in which the Christian 
‘abides,’ ‘loving his brother’ and 
‘believing’; just as the unbeliever 
‘abides in darkness’ (John xii. 46), 
and ‘he that loveth not, ‘in death’ 
(c. iii. 14). 

ἐν τ. 0. μ. καὶ ὁ 6. ἐν av. [μ.]] abideth 
in God and God [abideth] in him. 
See ὃ. 15 Additional Note. He that 
so abideth in love hath risen to the 
heavenly order (Col. iii. 3) and found 


IV. 17] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


157 


γεν TOU r , « ? , θ᾽ © ks .“ 
υτῳ τετελείωται ἡ ἀγαπὴ MED ἡμῶν, ἵνα παρ- 


17 ἡ ἀγάπη: - τοῦ θεοῦ the (lat). 


the power of divine fellowship for the 
accomplishment of earthly work. 

It has been seen that this twofold 
blessing is connected with obedience 
(iii. 24) and confession (iv. 15). And 
love involves obedience (John xiv. 15 
τηρήσετε, Rom. xiii. 10), and is the 
condition of fuller knowledge (John 
xiv. 21 ff). 

17. Ἔν rourg...] In this... The re- 
ference has been variously explained. 
Some have connected in this with 
what follows, others with what pre- 
cedes. In the former case two views 
have been held. The words have been 
taken closely with the second of the 
following clauses, ἐν rovr@...ért...in 
this...because.... and again with the 
first, ἐν rotte...va..., in this...that 
... The former construction may be at 
once set aside. The intervening clause, 
ἵνα...κρίσεως, makes the connexion of 
ἐν τούτῳ With ὅτι most unnatural. The 
connexion of ἐν τούτῳ with ἵνα gives a 
true sense and is not foreign to St 
John’s style, though the exact com- 
bination does not occur (not John 
xv. 8) in his writings; for it would not 
be strange that he should use a final 
particle (ja) in place of a demon- 
strative particle (ὅτι), in order to 
bring out the idea of effort involved 
to the last in the realisation of con- 
fidence (comp. John xvii. 3; ¢. iii. 
11 note). But the context and his 
general usage (comp. ii. 3 note) fa- 
vour the conclusion that the refer- 
ence is to that which precedes. The 
argument requires the affirmation of 
a fact from which a consequence is 
drawn, rather than a further expla- 
nation of how love is perfected. The 
fellowship of man with God and of 
God with man carries with it the 
consummation of love. Jn this— 
in this double communion—love hath 
been perfected already on the divine 


wel? ἡμῶν: +év ἡμῖν &. 


side; and it is God’s will that men 
should make its blessings their own 
in view of the close of earthly life. 

Jerome has a strange inversion of 
the sense of the passage: In hoc per- 
fecta est...caritas, si fiduciam habe- 
amus...ut quomodo 1116 est sic et nos 
simus... (c. Juvin. i. ο. 40). 

τετελ. ped ἡμῶν) perfecta est no- 
biscum V., is (hath been) perfected 
withus, Therecan benodoubtthatped? 
ἡμῶν is to be joined with the verb. 
The structure of the sentence is de- 
cisive against taking ἡ dy. μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν 
together in the sense ‘the love which 
is realised between Christians,’ or 
‘the love of God shewn among us.’ 
The unique form of expression ap- 
pears to have been chosen in place of 
the simple ‘hath been perfected in 
us’ in order to place the perfection 
clearly in the realised fellowship of 
God and man. Love is not simply 
perfected in man (ἐν ἡμῖν) by an act 
of divine power, but in fulfilling this 
issue God works with man (μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν). 
Something of the same thought of 
cooperation is seen in Acts xv. 4, 
ὅσα ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς per’ αὐτῶν. Comp. 
2 John 3 ἔσται μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν χάρις.... 

Philo calls attention to a use of the 
preposition not unlike in Gen. iii. 12 
(LXX. ἡ γυνὴ ἣν ἔδωκας μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ): 
εὖ τὸ μὴ φάναι ἡ γυνὴ ἣν ἔδωκας 
ἐμοὶ ἀλλὰ μετ’ ἐμοῦ. οὐ γὰρ ἐμοὶ ὡς 
κτῆμα.. ἔδωκας ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτὴν ἀφῆκας 
ἄνετον καὶ ἐλευθέραν... (Leg. Alleg. iii. 
8 18; 1, οὗ m.). 

τετελείωται] Ὁ. 12; 6. ii, 5 note. 
The tense presents the perfection as 
dependent on a continuous fellowship 
between God and the Christian body. 
Contrast Clem. ad Cor. i. 50 οἱ ἐν 
ἀγάπῃ τελειωθέντες. 

ἵνα παρρ. ex.) ut fiduciam habea- 
mus V. The fulness of love is given 
with a view to an end. The feeling 


158 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IV. 17 


wt ~ € a ΄ t « ‘ 
ρησίαν ἔχωμεν ἐν TH ἡμέρᾳ τῆς κρίσεως, OTL καθὼς 


ἔχωμεν: ἔχομεν δὰ, 


which is active now will have its 
fullest effect in the supreme trial of 
existence. St John, who habitually 
regards the eternal aspect of things, 
regards the boldness as something 
which is possessed absolutely (rere- 
λείωται.. «ἵνα ἔχωμεν...). In an earlier 
passage (ii. 28), he enjoined abiding 
in God in Christ as the source of 
confidence at Christ’s Presence. He 
now points out how the confidence is 
established. To abide in God is to 
share the character of Christ under 
the conditions of earth. The sense 
of spiritual harmony with Him which 
this abiding brings necessarily in- 
spires boldness in the believer; and 
it is the purpose of God that it should 
do so. So God fulfils His counsel of 
love. Thus the whole train of thought 
is brought to a natural conclusion. 
“God is love: he that abideth in 
love abideth in God...In this com- 
munion love finds consummation, in 
order that ‘by conscious conformity 
with Christ’ the last trial of life may 
be overcome, when ‘the last fear is 
banished.’” 

mapp. ἔχωμεν] 6. ii, 28 note. 

ev TH ἡμ. τῆς Kp.] in die judicit V., 
in the day of judgment, when Christ 
shall come to execute judgment on 
the world (c. ii 28). The definite 
phrase is found here only. The in- 
definite phrase, ‘a day of judgment’ 
(jp. xp.), occurs in Matt. x. 15; xi. 
22, 24; xii. 36; 2 Pet. ii. 9; 1. 7. 
Compare also Apoc. Vi. 17 ἡ ἡμ. ἡ 
μεγάλη τῆς ὀργῆς αὐτῶν; Rom. ii. 5 ἡμ. 
ὀργῆς καὶ ἀποκαλύψεως τῆς δικαιοκρι- 
σίας τοῦ θεοῦ; 1 Pet. ii 12 np. ἐπι- 
σκοπῆς. In the Gospel St John speaks 
of ‘the last day’ (ἡ ἐσχάτη ἡμ.); vi. 
39, 40, 44, 54; xi. 24; xii. 48; which 
is elsewhere styled simply ‘that day’ 
(ἐκείνη ἡ ἡμ., ἡ ἡμ. ἐκ), Matt. vii. 22; 
Luke vi. 23; x. 12; xxi. 34; 2 Thess, 


ἡμέρᾳ: ἀγάπῃ &. 


i. 10; 2 Tim. i. 12, 18; iv. 8 The 
phrase ‘the judgment’ (ἡ κρίσις) is 
found Matt. xii. 41 f.; Luke x. 14; 
xi. 31 f. 

It is of interest to notice that the 
privilege which is here attributed to 
love is, under another aspect, attri- 
buted also to faith; John iii. 18; v. 
24. The two cannot be separated. 

ὅτι καθὼς exeivos...] because eten as 
He (Christ, ¢. ii. 6 note] is... The 
ground of boldness is present likeness 
to Christ. He has ‘ passed out of this 
world’ (John xiii. 1), but His disciples 
are still ‘in the world’ (John xvii. 
11), and have a work to do there 
(John xvii. 18). In fulfilling this 
work He is their ideal (c. ii. 6): con- 
formity to Him is the rule of their 
judgment (John xv. 18 ff). And 
the likeness of Christians to Christ is 
to His character as it is at present 
and eternally (καθὼς ἐκ. ἐστιν, comp. 
iii. 2, 7) and not to the particular form 
in which it was historically manifested 
(κ. ἐκ. ἦν). 

The reference is not to any one 
attribute, as love or righteousness, 
but to the whole character of Christ 
as it is made known; and, His high- 
priestly prayer serves as a commen- 
tary on the view which St John sug- 
gests of the position of Christians in 
the world. 

Following Augustine (see iii. 7 note) 
Bede says forcibly: Non semper ad 
zequalitatem dicitur sicué, sed dicitur 
ad quandam similitudinem... Si ergo 
facti sumus ad imaginem Dei, quare 
non sicut Deus sumus? non ad sequa- 
litatem sed pro modo nostro. Inde 
ergo nobis datur fiducia iu die judicii, 
quia ,sicut ille est et nos sumus in 
hoc mundo, imitando videlicet perfec- 
tionem dilectionis in mundo cujus ille 
exemplum nobis quotidie preebet de 
ceelo, 


IV. 18] 


= ἢ \ os 
ἐκεῖνος ἐστιν Kal ἡμεῖς 
La » ~ 
8 boBos οὐκ ἐστιν ἐν TH 
Uf , Α ΄ 
ἔξω βάλλει Tov poor, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


159 


᾽ \ - U 

ἐσμὲν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ τούτῳ. 
’ ‘ > > © i, ’ a : 
ἀγάπη, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ τελεία ἀγάπη 
YA Ψ' , ‘i 

ὅτι ὁ φόβος κόλασιν ἔχει, ὁ 


ἐσμέν: ἐσόμεθα &. 


καθὼς. .«καὶ ἡμεῖς...) The οὕτως in 
the second member of the comparison 
is sometimes replaced by καὶ: c. ii. 6, 
18; John xvii. 18; xx. 21 (xv. 9 is 
doubtful); sometimes it is omitted : 
6. ii. 27; and especially when the 
order of the clauses is inverted: John 
v. 23; Rom. xv. 7. 

καὶ ἡμ. ἐ. ἐν τῷ x. τ] The likeness is 
conditioned by the circumstances of 
the present state. ‘This world’ (6 
x. οὗτος), a8 distinguished from ‘the 
world,’ emphasises the idea of transi- 
toriness. The phrase is not found 
elsewhere in the Epistles of John. 
See John i. ro note. 

18. The thought of boldness neces- 
sarily calls up that of its opposite, fear. 
There is fear in man naturally; but 
love ever tends to expel it. Fear 
finds no place in love, and it cannot 
therefore co-exist with perfect love 
which occupies the whole ‘heart.’ 
The ideas are expressed in a general 
form and hold good absolutely, but 
they necessarily are specialised men- 
tally from the context. 

φόβος...ἐν τῇ dy.], Love is the sim- 
ple desire for the highest good of 
another or of others, and is the ex- 
pression of a spirit of self-surrender. 
Fear therefore—the shrinking from 
another—cannot be an essential ele- 
ment in love. Here the reader at 
once feels that the abstract principle 
has found a typical embodiment in 
the self-sacrifice of Christ, towards 
the imitation of which Christians 
strive through His Spirit. 

The fear of which St John speaks 
is, of course, not the reverence of the 
son (Hebr. v. 7 ff.), but the dread of 
the criminal or of the slave (Rom. 
viii. 15). 


So Augustine says: Aliud est ti- 
mere Deum ne mittat te in gehen- 
nam cum diabolo: aliud est timere 
Deum ne recedat a te. 

ἀλλ᾽...1 bet, so far is it from being 
the case that fear has a place in love, 
it is of the nature of love to expel 
fear. Fear is an instrument of painful 
discipline ; and when the end of per- 
fect fellowship with God has been 
reached, the discipline is no longer 
needed. This sentence ἀλλ᾽... ἔχει is 
parenthetical. 

ἡ τελ. ἀγάπη] perfect love, not ‘per- 
fected love’ (ἡ τετελειωμένη dy.). The 
thought is of love which is complete 
in all its parts, which has reached its 
complete development (Hebr. v. 14 
note); of what it 7s and not of what 
it has become. Comp. James i. 4; 
iii. 2; Eph. iv. 13. 

The arrangement ἡ red. dy., which is 
common, for example, in 2 Pet., is 
unique in the Epistle (comp. 3 John 4 
τὰ ἐμὰ τέκνα). See c. ii. 7 note. It 
expresses a shade of meaning, as dis- 
tinct from ἡ dy. ἡ τελ., which is evi- 
dently appropriate here. 

ἔξω βάλλει] foras mittit V., cast- 
eth forth from the whole sphere of 
life. There is no longer scope for its 
operation. St John thus recognises 
the provisional presence of fear in 
the believer. It is found for a time 
with growing love, but mature love 
removes it. The phrase βάλλει ἔξω, 
which suggests the thought of a de- 
fined realm of spiritual activity (Apoc. 
xxii. 15), is more vivid than ἐκβάλλει. 
Comp. Matt. v. 13; xiii. 48; Luke xiv. 
35 (βάλλειν ἔξω); John vi. 37; ix. 
34 f.; xii. 31; xv. 6 (ἐκβάλλειν ἔξω). 

ὅτι ὁ φ. KOA. ἔχει] Quoniam timor 
penam (tormentum Aug.) habet V., 


160 


‘ vt ? a ? at ? , 

δὲ φοβούμενος οὐ τετελείωται ἐν TH ἀγαπή. 
᾽ a ἣν - > TS cos 
ἀγαπῶμεν, ὅτι αὐτὸς πρώτος ἠγάπησεν mas. 


19 ἡμεῖς NB me the syrhl: +odv A vg syrvg. 
(αὐτόν and invicem are also added.) 


δὲ (vg) me syrr. 
ὁ θεός A ve. 


because fear hath punishment. Fear, 
which is the expression of disharmony 
and therefore the anticipation of suf- 
fering, at the same time must include 
suffering. And the suffering which 
comes from disharmony with God is 
divine punishment which has a sa- 
lutary office: Hebr. xii. 11. Such 
punishment is not future only but 
present. Comp. John iii. 18. 

κόλ. ἔχει] includes, brings with it 
punishment. Comp. Hebr. x. 35 (τὴν 
παρρησίαν) ἥτις ἔχει μεγάλην μισθαπο- 
δοσίαν. James ii. 17 (i. 4). 

The word κόλασις occurs elsewhere 
in the N. T. only in Matt. xxv. 46. 
The verb κολάζεσθαι is found in Acts 
iv. 21; 2 Pet. ii 9 (notii. 4). The noun 
occurs in the Lxx. of Ezekiel (for 
DWI): xiv. 3, 4, 7; xviii. 30 (xliii 
11); xliv. 12; and both the noun and 
verb occur not unfrequently in Wis- 
dom: xi. 14,17; xvi. 1, 2, ὅσο, 

The familiar classical distinction be- 
tween τιμωρία, which regarded the re- 
tributive suffering, and κόλασις, which 
regarded the disciplinary chastisement 
of the wrong-doer, was familiar to the 
Alexandrine Greeks: eg. Philo, de 
confus. ling. § 34 (i. 431 M.) ἔστι δὲ 
καὶ κόλασις οὐκ ἐπιζήμιον ἁμαρτημάτων 
οὖσα κώλυσις καὶ ἐπανόρθωσις. 

ὁ δὲ φοβούμενος... and he that 
Jfeareth... This clause goes closely 
with the first clause of the sentence: 
‘there is no fear in love, but he that 
feareth hath not been made perfect 
in love.’ That which is stated first as an 
abstract principle (‘fear’) is repeated 
in a personal form (‘he that feareth’). 
St John, while he lays down the full 
truth, recognises the facts of life and 
deals with them. There are those 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IV. 19, 20 


19 Ἡμεῖς 
ΓΔ 
39 day 


ἀγαπῶμεν ΑΒ: -τὸν θεόν 
αὐτός 8B me the syrr: 


who fear while yet they love: so far 
their love though real is incom- 
plete. 

The second and third clauses of 
the verse illustrate well the distinc- 
tion of ἀλλά (sed) and δέ (autem). The 
second clause (ἀλλ᾽ ἡ τ. d.) stands in 
sharp opposition to the first, while 
the third (ὁ δὲ φ.) deals with a limita- 
tion, or objection. 

οὐ τετελείωται ἐν τῇ dy.) This con- 
summation of the believer is presented 
in two complementary forms. He is 
himself the sphere in which love finds 
its perfection ; and love is the sphere 
in which he finds his perfection. Love 
is perfected in him (ii. 5): and he is 
perfected in love. Comp. Additional 
Note on v. 15. 

Bengel in one of his unmatched 
epigrams gives a history of the soul 
through its relations to fear and love: 
Varius hominum status: sine timore 
et amore; cum timore sine amore; 
cum timore et amore; sine timore 
cum amore. 

19—21. In the preceding verses 
St John has shewn what love brings 
to the believer. He now lays open 
the obligation which it imposes upon 
him. The love which is inspired by 
God must be manifested towards the 
brethren according to His command- 
ment. 

τ We love, because he first loved us. 
If any one say I love God, and 
hate his brother, he is a liar ; for he 
that loveth not his brother whom he 
hath seen cannot love God, whom he 
hath not seen. 5: And this command- 
ment have we from him that he who 
loveth God love his brother also. 

_ 19. Ἡμεῖς dy.] Nos ergo diligamus 
incicem V. The absence of any title of 


IV. 20] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


161 


͵ ef ? - ‘ i“ A ΄- 

τις εἴπη ὅτι ᾿λγαπώ τὸν θεόν, καὶ τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ 
ton, ψεύστης ἐστίν" ὁ ya ἃ 2 Ww ἀδελφὸ 
Mion, n γὰρ μή ἀγαπῶν Tov adehpov 


20 --ὅτι ἐξ, 


address and the addition of the per- 
sonal pronoun distinguish this phrase 
from Ὁ. 7 ἀγαπητοί, ἀγαπῶμεν ἀλλή- 
λους, and seem to shew clearly that 
the verb is an indicative (We love), 
and not a conjunctive (Let us love). 
It is worthy of notice that the Latin 
and Pesh. Syriac which give the 
hortatory rendering add a connecting 
particle as many Greek authorities 
(ody). ; 

The indicative also suits the con- 
text better. The fact of love is as- 
sumed, and then it is shewn in its 
workings. Comp. iii. 16. 

According to the true reading the 
idea of love is left in its full breadth 
without any definition of the object, 
as God (αὐτόν or τὸν θεόν), or man 
(invicem V.). This is required by 
what follows, where it is falsely urged 
that the claims of ‘love’ can be satis- 
fied by bare ‘love of God.’ 

ὅτι αὐτὸς mp. ἦγ. ἡμ.] Comp. 2. το. 
The thought here is different from 
that in the former context. There 
love was regarded in its essence: here 
it is regarded in its personal exercise. 
Our love is the light kindled by the 
love of God. And the divine origin 
of love determines its character and 
also assures its stability. Comp. John 
XV. 16. 

πρῶτος ny.| prior dilexit V. Comp. 
Rom. v. 8. The priority of the love 
of God to all love on man’s part 
which is accentuated here, is a ground 
for the spontaneous exercise of love 
on the part of the believer tuwards 
those who do not seem to invite it. 

20, 21. The consequences of the 
preceding statement are traced out 
in two ways from the nature of the 
case (v. 20), and from the direct com- 
mandment of God (v. 21). The love 
of God, which is assumed to exist at 


W. J. 


least in profession, must include love 
of the brethren, and so God has Him- 
self enjoined. The thought of loving 
God is here first discussed (comp. v. 
10). 

20. ἐάν τις εἴπῃ] The form of ex- 
pression differs slightly from that in 
i. 6 ff (ἐὰν εἴπωμεν). There a view 
was given of the general position of 
Christians: here a particular case is 
taken, involving personal feeling. Con- 
trast also ‘he that [saith] and ‘every 
one that [saith], ὁ. iii, 3 note; ii. 
4 note. 

εἴπῃ ὅτι ᾿Αγαπώ...] For the use of 
the recitative ὅτε see i. 6 note. The 
claim is like those which have been 
noticed in ii. 4, 9; i. 6 ff, by which 
the faith is taken out of the sphere of 
practical life. 

It is worthy of notice that in the 
Gospel of St John ἀγαπᾶν is not used 
of the feeling of man for God (the 
Father). It is so used in the other 
Gospels in a quotation from the Lxx. 

μισῇ] hate. St John admits no po- 
sition of indifference. See ii. 9 note. 

ψεύστης ἐστίν] Comp. ii. 4 ὁ λέγων 
ὅτι Ἔγνωκα αὐτὸν καὶ τὰς ἐντολὰς αὐτοῦ 
μὴ τηρῶν ψεύστης ἐστίν... The claim 
to the knowledge of God without 
obedience, and the claim to the love 
of God without action, involve not 
only the denial of what is known to 
be true (ψεύδεσθαι), but falseness of 
character. Comp. i. Io note, and y. 
1o. See also John viii. 44, 55; and 
ὁ. ii, 22. 

6 yap μὴ ἀγαπῶν... for he that 
loveth not... The particular statement 
(ἐάν τις εἴπῃ) is refuted by ἃ general 
principle. Sight is taken as the sign 
of that kind of limitation which brings 
objects within the range of our pre- 
sent powers. It is necessarily easier 
to love that which is like ourselves 


IIT 


162 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[IV. 21 


᾽ fom δὶ δ ὦ \ μ᾿ «ὃ > eo 2 δύ 
QauTOU ον EWOAKEV, TOV θεὸν ον ουχ EWOAKEV Ov ουναται 


: A 
ayaray. 


ae \ , \ 3 \ of a ee 
Kal ταυτὴν THY EVTOANY ἔχομεν aT αὑτοῦ, 


of © τὰ = al \ ? = \ ‘ 7 x ? 
iva ὁ ἀγαπῶν Tov θεὸν ἀγαπᾷ καὶ Tov ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ. 


οὐ δύν. NB the syrhl: πῶς δύν. A vg me syrvg. 


θεοῦ A vg. 


than that which we cannot grasp in 
a finite form. And the title ‘ brother’ 
brings out the idea of that which is 
godlike in man to which love can be 
directed. He therefore who fails to 
recognise God as He reveals Himself 
through Christ in man (Matt. xxv. 40 
ἑνὶ τούτων τῶν ἀδελφῶν pou τῶν éda- 
χίστων) cannot love God. He has 
refused the help which God has pro- 
vided for the expression of love in 
action. 

Philo traces the thought through 
the natural love of children for pa- 
rents: φασί τινες ὡς ἄρα πατὴρ καὶ 
μήτηρ ἐμφανεῖς εἰσὶ θεοί.. ἀμήχανον δὲ 
εὐσεβεῖσθαι τὸν ἀόρατον ὑπὸ τῶν εἰς 
τοὺς ἐμφανεῖς καὶ ἐγγὺς ὄντας ἀσεβούν- 
tov (de decal. § 23, ii. Ῥ. 204 Μ.). The 
love of parents involves the love of 
brethren. 

τὸν 6. ὃν οὐχ ἑώρ.] John i. 18 note; 
Ὁ. 12 (τεθέαται) ; τ Tim. vi. 16. The 
inverted order in the corresponding 
clauses is singularly expressive. There 
is also a more solemn pathos in the 
direct negative οὐ δύναται than in the 
more rhetorical phrase of the com- 
mon text πῶς δύναται. 

ἑώρακεν..«.οὐχ ἑώρακεν...] videt... 
non videt... V., hath seen...hath not 
seen... It might have seemed more 
natural to say ‘seeth...cannot see...’; 
but the two perfects mark the fact 
that a revelation with abiding conse- 
quences has and has not been made 
in the two cases. The vision of ‘the 
brother’ may in any particular case 


21 ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ: ἀπὸ τοῦ 


be clouded but he has been seen, and 
the idea of brotherhvod abides for 
constant use. 

21. καὶ ταύτην τ. é.] That which is 
a spiritual necessity is also an express 
injunction. The commandment of 
love which has been implied in the 
preceding verses is now defined. 
Comp. ὁ. iii. 23. 

an’ αὐτοῦ] a Deo V., ab ipso Lat. 
Vet., from Him, from God. The con- 
text makes it probable that, though 
the Divine Person is not clearly de- 
fined, the reference is to the Father 
(Ὁ. 19), Who by sending His Son 
shewed the way of love. The com- 
mandment was given in substance by 
Christ (John xiii. 34), but it came 
from God (ἀπό) as its final source. 
Compare i. 5; ii. 27 notes; and con- 
trast the use of mapa Apoc. ii. 27; 
John viii. 26, 40; x. 18. 

ἵνα...) that... The final particle 
gives more than the simple contents 
of the commandment. It marks the 
injunction as directed to an aim; and 
implies that the effort to obtain it 
can never be relaxed (ἕνα... ἀγαπᾷ). 
Comp. John xiii. 34 note. 

Augustine (on c. v. 3) uses the 
words of the ascended Lord to Saul 
to illustrate and enforce the lesson : 
Persecutori Saulo [Christus] dixit de- 
super: Saule, Saule, quid me perse- 
queris? Ascendiin czelum, sed adhue 
in terra jaceo. Hic ad dexteram pa- 
tris sedeo: ibi adhue esurio, sitio et 
peregrinus sum. : 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 163 


Additional Note on the reading of iv. 3. 


The first clause in this verse is given in several different forms in ex- General 


isting Greek authorities. These are view of 
τ τι A ᾿ my the varia- 
π. mv. ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ΑΒ. igus 


π. πν. ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ Ἰησοῦν Κύριον ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα δὰ. 

mw. wv. ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ τὸν Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα L, &e. 

π. mv. ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα ἈΚ, &e. 

To these variations must be added another, which is represented by the 
Vulgate reading : 


mw. πν. ὃ λύει τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν. 
The main interest centres on the alternatives μὴ ὁμολογεῖ and λύει. 
As the direct evidence now stands, μὴ ὁμολογεῖ is read: by External 
(1) All Greek mss, uncial and cursive, ae 
(2) All the versions except the Latin, and by one important ola © ; 
(i γᾷ μὴ ὁμο- 
Latin ms (Fris.), λογεῖ, 


(3) The Greek Fathers who quote the passage with the exception 
of Socrates, trom Cyril downwards, to whom Polycarp must probably be 
added: πᾶς yap ὃς ἂν μὴ ὁμολογῇ Ἰησοῦν Χριστὸν ἐληλυθέναι ἀντίχριστός 
ἐστι (ad Phil. 7). 
On the other hand 
(1) Socrates gives λύει as having been the reading in ‘the old (ii) for 
copies.’ ᾿ λύει. 
(2) All Latin mss, with one exception, read solvit ; and 
(3) This reading, with the variant destruit, prevails in the Latin 
Fathers, being universal in the later writers. 

The evidence of Socrates, the only Greek authority for λύει, is contained The evi- 
in a passage which presents several difficulties. Speaking of the error of dence of 
Nestorius and of his general self-sufficiency and contempt for accurate BOGERTEE. 
learning, he goes on to say: ‘for example he was ignorant of the fact that 
in the Catholic Epistle of John it was written in the ancient copies that 
every spirit which divideth (λύει) Jesus is not from God. For they that 
desired to separate the deity from the man of the dispensation [i.e. Christ 
Jesus] removed this thought [the condemnation of those who ‘divide 
Jesus’] from the ancient copies. Wherefore also the aucient interpreters 
noted this very fact, that there were some who had tampered with the 
epistle wishing to divide the man from God*,’ 

It will be seen that Socrates does not say that the reading was found in 
copies which he had himself seen, but only that it once was found in the 
text: he writes that it ‘had been written’ (yéypamro) and not that ‘it is 
written’ (γέγραπται). Again it is a sign that he is not quoting any Greek 


1 A. E. vii. 32, αὐτίκα γοῦν ἠγνόησεν τῆς οἰκονομίας ἀνθρώπου βουλόμενοι τὴν 
ὅτι ἐν τῇ καθολικῇ ᾿Ιωάννου γέγραπτο ἐν θεότητα" διὸ καὶ οἱ παλαιοὶ ἑρμην εἷς αὐτὸ 
τοῖς παλαιοῖς ἀντιγράφοις ὅτι πᾶν πνεῦμα τοῦτο ἐπεσημήναντο, ws τινες εἶεν ῥᾳδιουρ- 
ὃ λύει τὸν Ἰησοῦν ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ ἔστι. yhoavres τὴν ἐπιστολήν, λύειν ἀπὸ τοῦ 
ταύτην γὰρ τὴν διάνοιαν ἐκ τῶν παλαιῶν θεοῦ τὸν ἄνθρωπον θέλοντες. 
ἀντιγράφων περιεῖλον οἱ χωρίζειν ἀπὸ τοῦ 


1i—z2 


Quota- 
tions in 
texts of 
Greek 
Fathers. 


Latin 
Patristic 
evidence. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


ms that he writes ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ for ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ, a variant which has no Greek 
authority. His language is in fact perfectly satisfied by the supposition 
that he was acquainted with the Latin reading and some Latin com- 
mentary!. 

In the Latin translation of Inex.eus 2 John 7 and 1 John iv. 3 are quoted 
as from the same epistle (Iren. iii. 16,8). After the quotation of the former 
passage the text continues...Johannes in preedicta epistula fugere cos prie- 
cepit dicens...omnis spiritus qui soleit Jesum non est ex Deo sed de (ex) 
Antichristo est. The context shews clearly in what sense Irenzeus under- 
stood St John’s words, but it is not decisive as to the reading which he had 
in his Greek text. 

The Latin translation of CLeMENT’s Outlines (Ὑποτυπώσεις) on 2 Johu 
gives as part of the substance of this Epistle: adstruit in hac epistola... 
ut nemo dividat Jesum Christum, sed unum credere Jesum Chrisiwm 
venisse in carne. 

The reading ‘solvit Jesum’ is found in the Latin translation of OrIGEY : 
Heec autem dicentes non solvimus suscepti corporis hominem, cum sit 
scriptum apud Johannem omnis spiritus qui solvit Jesum non est ex Deo, 
sed unicuique substantia proprietatem servamus (in Matt. Com. Ser. 
§ 65). But the character of the translation is such as to give no satis- 
factory assurance that Origen’s Greek text read λύει. 

There is no indication, as far as I am aware, that the reading Avec was 
accepted by or known to any other Greek or Eastern father. 

Yet the fact remains that the reading was found at a very early date. 
TERTULLIAN uses the phrases ‘solvere Jesum’ (adv. Mare. v. 16) and ‘sol- 
vere Jesum Christum’ (de Jejun.1). In the former passage he appears to 
combine the language of 1 John iv. 3 and 2 John 7, as is done in the Latin 
translation of Clement : Johannes dicit processisse in mundum preecursores 
antichristi spiritus, negantes Christum in carne venisse et solventes Jesum ; 
and it may be observed that the close connexion of the two verses in some 
of the Latin renderings (which give venisse for ἐρχόμενον in 2 John 7) makes 
it difficult to decide to which of the two reference is made in particular 
cases. The words of Tertullian de Carne Chr. 24 qui negat Christum in 
carne venisse hic antichristus est; de Prescr. her. 33 in epistola sua 
[Johannes] eos maxime antichristos vocat gut Christum negarent in carne 
venisse et qui non putarent Jesum jilium Dei esse (comp. c. Mare. iii. 8 
negantes Christum in carne venisse); and of Cyprian (Zestim. ii. 8) qui 
autem negat in carne venisse de Deo non est sed est de antichristi spiritu?, 
were probably moulded by the passage in the second epistle. 

AUGUSTINE in his explanation of the epistle first quotes the passage at 
length with the reading ‘qui non confitetur Jesum Christum in carne 
venisse, which he explains (referring to c. ii. 19), and then without any 
remark he passes on to explain ‘solvere’: Adeo ut noveritis quia ad facta 
retulit: Et omnis spiritus, ait, gui solvit Jesum; and again afterwards 
he unites both phrases : ‘ solvis Jesum et negas in carne venisse. 


2 : Socrates _ Was acquainted with 2 All. de Deo natus non est sed est 
Latin: H. E. i. 12. aAntichristus. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


The variations in PRriscILL1aN are very instructive: Johannes ait omnis 
spiritus...qui solvit Jesum de Deo non est... (Tract. i. 37). Scriptum est: 
omnis spiritus qui confitetur...qui autem non conjitetur de Deo non est 
(Tract. ii. 52). Ilam apostolicam feramus jure sententiam omnem spiritum 
qui negat Jesum de Deo non esse et omnem spiritum... (Tract. iii. 67). 

Funeentius! and Ticnonius? combine phrases from the two epistles 
with even greater freedom. 

It is remarkable that Bepx, who was aware of the substance of Socrates’ 
criticism, supposes that those who tampered with the epistle left out the 
whole clause: In tantum ex Deo non sunt ut quidam...hunc...versiculum 
quo dicitur δέ omnis spiritus qui solvit Jesum ex Deo non est, ex hac 
epistola eraserint, ne scilicet per auctoritatem beati Joannis convinceretur 
error eorum. Denique Nestorius nescire se prodidit hanc authenticis ex- 
emplaribus inditam fuisse sententiam... 

This strange assertion is repeated by Futbert of Cuarrres’, and 
Hincomar‘4 Such a misunderstanding offers a memorable example of the 
way in which critical statements are unintelligently perverted and made the 
ground of unjust charges. 


165 


From this review there can be no question as to the overwhelming weight Internal 


of external evidence in favour of μὴ ὁμολογεῖ. To set this aside without the 
clearest necessity is to suspend all laws of textual criticism. No reading sup- 
ported by such authority as λύει is, I believe, more than a very early gloss. 
And on careful consideration it seems that the internal evidence is not 
more favourable to λύει Ἰησοῦν than the external. It is scarcely possible 
that such a phrase could be used for separating the divine and human 
natures in Christ. The name Ἰησοῦς brings prominently forward the 
humanity of the Lord. Socrates evidently felt this, for he defines λύειν 
by the addition ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ. 

The language of Polycarp shews that St John’s teaching upon the sub- 
ject was current in various forms. It seems likely that he used two main 
phrases λύειν Ἰησοῦν Χριστόν and μὴ ὁμολογεῖν τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν (answering to 
Κύριος Ἰησοῦς Rom. x. 9). This being so, the λύει in the former phrase was 
added as a gloss on the phrase μὴ ὁμολογεῖ of the epistle in some early 


1 Ad Trasim. i.e. 5. De qua veri- 
tate...ille qui de pectore ipsius sapien- 


carne venisse de Deo non est sed hic de 
Antichristo est. Quod audistis quoniam 


tis mysteriorum calestium meruit 
intelligentiam illuminatus haurire fidu- 
cialiter dicit: omnis spiritus qui confi- 
tetur Jesum Christum in carne venisse 
ex Deo est. Omnis spiritus qui non con- 
Jfitetur Jesum Christum in carne venisse 
ex Deo non est; et hic est Antichristus. 
Ep. xvii. 6. το Joannes...testatur quia 
omnis spiritus qui solvit Jesum ex Deo 
non est, et hic est antichristus. 

2 Reg. iv. Super Joannem multi pseu- 
doprophet@ prodierunt in hune mundum. 
In isto cognoscite spiritus Dei. Omnis 
spiritus qui solvit Jesum et negat in 


venit et nunc in isto mundo presens est. 

3 Ep. v. (i) Cujus [Arii] auditores 
quoniam Spiritum Sanctum Deum esse 
negabant de Evangelio eraserunt illud 
quod Salvator ait Spiritus est Deus, et 
de epistola Joannis eraserunt et omnis 
spiritus qui solvit Jesum ex Deo non 
est. " Sicut Nestorius... 

4 Opusc. et Epist. xvili. (Migne, Patr. 
Lat. exxvi. p. 351) quidam etiam de 
epistola Joannis eraserunt et omnis 
spiritus qui solvit Jesum ex Deo non est. 
The whole paragraph is very instruc- 
tive. 


evidence. 


166 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


copies, and so passed into the Latin version’. The additions to Ἰησοῦν are 
easily intelligible, and the forms in which they occur shew that they are 
no part of the original text. At the same time it is not unreasonable to 
suppose that the unusual amount of variants indicates the influence of some 
traditional form of words upon the text. In 2 Jolin 7 there is no variation 
in the corresponding phrase ; nor is the characteristic word of that passage 
(ἐρχόμενον) introduced here by any authority. 


Additional Note on iv. 8. The revelation of God. 


Tenden- Jewish thought in the age of St John represented in striking forms the 
cies to- _ two chief tendencies of religious speculation on the Being of God. On the 
wards tWO one side there way the philosophic, theoretic tendency which leads to 
concep- ἢ : 

tions of an abstract conception ; and on the other the popular, practical tendency 
God in the which leads to a concrete conception. The former found an exponent in 
Apostolic Philo: the latter was embodied in the current creed of Palestine, which 


a Seer and more and more reduced the God of the Covenant to the position of the God 


concrete, of the Jews. 


St John St John unites the truths which gave force to these tendencies, the 
a transcendental and the personal truth, in a perfect harmony. He wholly 
em. 


avoids the Alexandrine terms—ro ὄν, ἐπέκεινα πάσης οὐσίας and the like— 
and yet he preserves the thoughts at which they aimed. He recognises 
most emphatically the privileges of Israel, and at the same time he places 
the ‘One God’ in a living, loving connexion with ‘the world.’ 

His teach. The foundation of his teaching lies in the Monotheism of the O. T., 
ing rests which is not rigid, sterile, final, like the Monotheism of Islam, but vital and 
onthe progressive. The unity which it affirms is not numerical but essential 


Old Testa- ; sss SEAL Ie ᾿ς ws ae 

iment. (John x. 30 ἐγὼ καὶ ὁ πατὴρ ἕν ἐσμεν : comp. xvii. 3; 1 John v. 20). 

Opposed In this sense the thought of ‘the only God’ (John v. 44) is opposed to 
to all forms of Dualism, Polytheism, Pantheism. He is the One source of life 


(John v. 26); and through the Word, ‘the Son, to Whom ‘he gave to have 

Dualism, life in himself’ (John l.c.), ‘all things came into being’ (John i. 3). All 
notion of coeternal matter or of a coeternal principle of evil, as antago- 
nistic to or limiting the divine action, is set aside. God ‘loved the world’ 
(John iii. 16; comp. 1 John ii. 2) not as strange but as His own. All men 
need (John iii. 3) and all men are capable of (John xii. 32) union with 
Him. The devil left his first place ‘in the Truth’ (John viii. 44); and 
Christ ‘came to undo his works’ (1 John iii. 8) by taking ‘flesh, which 
could not therefore have been in essential opposition to His Nature. 

Poly- The allusions to Polytheism in St John are naturally less prominent than 

theism, those in St Paul. Once in general terms he warns against ‘the idols’ which 


1 A passage of Cyril of Alexandria τοῦ ᾿Αντιχρίστου πνεῦμα ἔχων ἁλώσεται 
will shew how naturally the gloss (de recta fide ad reg. p. 94). The Greek 
might be introduced. He quotes the version of Leo’s Letter to Flavian (c.v. 
passage: πᾶν πνεῦμα ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ τὸν _p. 830) gives πᾶν πνεῦμα τὸ διαιροῦν Ἰη- 
Ἰησοῦν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ ἔστι and then in σοῦν Χριστὸν ἀπὸ θεοῦ οὐκ ἔστι καὶ οὗτός 
his interpretation adds ὁ τοίνυν οὐ λέγων ἐστιν ὁ ᾿Αντίχριστος as the rendering of 
θεὸν εἶναι ἀληθῶς τὸν Χριστὸν διαιρῶν δὲ — the Latin omnis spiritus quisolvit Jesum 
kal κατασμικρύνων τὴν δόξαν αὐτοῦ τὸ ex Deo non est et hic est Antichristus. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 167 


usurp the place of ‘the true God’ (1 John vy. 21); and in the Apocalypse he 
marks the connexion between the empire and idolatry (xiii. 14 f.; and comp. 
xxi. 8; xxii. 15). But his teaching is directed rather against the spirit than 
against the form of polytheism. ‘The only true God, God revealed as 
Father in the Son, excludes polytheism of necessity both within and with- 
out the Christian Body. 

St John, like St Paul, places Creation in close relation with the Creator, Pan- 
but he affirms the reality of the relation which the words imply. God is theism. 
present in all things but He transcends them. They answered to His will 
in their beginning ( (Apoe. iv. 11), and are supported by His working (John 
v. 17). 

For the most part St John, like the other writers of the Bible, leaves St John’s 
the reader to form his conception of God from what is recorded of His three 
action ; but in three phrases he has laid down once for all the great outlines loca ἃς 
within which our thoughts on the Divine Nature must be confined. The to the 
first sentence is in his narrative of the Lord’s words: ‘God is spirit’ (John Divine 
iv. 24); the two others are in his first Epistle: ‘God is light’ (1 Johni. 5 note) Nature. 
and ‘God is love’ (1 John iv. 8, 16). 

To these may be added a fourth, in which he speaks of the revelation of 
‘Him that is true’ made in ‘Jesus Christ His Son’: ‘this,’ he says, ‘is the 
true God and eternal life’ (1 John v. 20). So he passes from the idea of 
God to the revelation of God to man. 

The three phrases which have been quoted do not simply specify proper- 
ties of God (as ‘God is loving’), but, so far as we can apprehend them, 
essential aspects of His Nature. The first, if we may venture to distinguish 
them, is metaphysical and describes God in Himself, in His Being: He is 
Spirit. The second is moral, and describes God in His character towards 
all created things: He is Light. The third is personal, and describes God 
in His action towards self-conscious creatures: He is Love. In this order 
they offer a progress of thought: each statement is taken up and developed 
in that which follows. 

i. God ts spirit (πνεῦμα ὁ θεός). The statement obviously refers to the i. God is 
divine nature and not to the divine personality. The parallel phrases are Spirit. 
a sufficient proof of this. God is not ‘a spirit, as one of many, but ‘spirit.’ 

As spirit, He is absolutely raised above all limitations of succession (time 
and space) into which finally all thoughts of change and transitoriness are 
resolved. 

There is no anticipation of this idea in the O.T. The ‘Spirit of God’ is 
constantly spoken of; but the loftiest descriptions of the Divine Majesty are 
always relative to space (Is. Ixvi. 1; 1 K. viii. 27; Jer. xxiii. 24). 

It follows that God as God is not cugnisable by the senses (John i. 18 
1 John iv. 12). The Theophanies of the O. T. were not manifestations of 
‘God’ but of the Son of God (John xii. 41; Is. vi. 1; comp. Apoc. iv. 2 ff.). 

But while the material vision of God is impossible, there is a spiritual 
and a moral vision of God through Christ (John xiv. 9; comp. xii. 45) and 
through love, which leads up to the transfiguring contemplation of the 
Divine Presence (1 John iii. 2). 

ii. God is light (ὁ θεὸς φῶς ἐστίν. This statement again is absolute ii. God is 
as to the Nature of God, and not as to His action (not ‘a light’ or ‘the light. 


168 


iii. God is 
love. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


light of men’), The phrase expresses unlimited self-communication, diffu- 
siveness. Light is by shining: darkness alone bounds. And further, the 
communication of light is of that which is pure and glorious. Such is God 
towards all finite being, the condition of life and action. He reveals Him- 
self through the works of creation which reflect His perfections in a form 
answering to the powers of man, and yet God is not to be fully apprehended 
by man as [He is. 

The idea is not distinctly expressed in the O. T., though it underlies the 
thought of the Divine ‘glory’ (Ex. xxiv. 17; Hab. iii. 3 f.). Compare also 
Is. x. 17; Ps. xxxvi. 9; civ. 2; Ezek. 1. 27. It is indicated in Wisdom 
(vii. 26), and Philo uses the very words of St John: de Somn. i. p. 632, 
πρῶτον μὲν ὁ θεὸς has eori...xat οὐ μόνον φῶς ἀλλὰ καὶ παντὸς ἑτέρου φωτὸς 
ἀρχέτυπον μᾶλλον δὲ ἀρχετύπου πρεσβύτερον, καὶ ἀνώτερον, λόγον ἔχων παρα- 
δείγματος. Compare also Philo de nom. mut. i. 579; de sacrif. ii. p. 254; 
one remarkable phrase which Philo uses deserves to be quoted: ὁ θεὸς 
ἑαυτοῦ φέγγος ὧν δι’ αὐτοῦ μόνου θεωρεῖται (de prem. et pan. ii. 415). 

The idea of Light, it may be added, passes into that of Fire; but this 
thought is not brought out by St John (Hebr. xii. 29: Deut. iv. 24). 

iii. God is love (ὁ debs ἀγάπη ἐστίν. In this declaration the idea of 
‘personality’ is first revealed, and in the case of God necessarily of a self- 
sufficing personality (see Additional Note on v. 20). The idea of God is not 
only that of an unlimited self-communication, but a self-communication 
which calls out and receives a response (1 John iv. 7 ff.), which requires the 
recognition not only of glory but of goodness. And this love is original, 
and not occasioned (1 John iv. 10). It corresponds to the innermost nature 
of God, and finds its source in Him and not in man (1 John iv. 19, iii. 1), 
non enim habet homo unde Deum diligat nisi ex Deo (Aug. De Trin. xv. 17, 
32). It is not like the love which is called out in the finite by the sense of 
imperfection (ἔρως Plat. Sympos. pp. 201 ff.), but is the expression of per- 
fect benevolence. The only earthly image which answers to it is the love of 
parents for children (Eph. iii. 15), while that of Christ for the Church is 
likened to the love of husband for wife (Eph. v. 25); compare the view of 
the relation of Jehovah to Israel in the Old Test. (Jer. ii.; Hos. ii.). 

Augustine argues that the name ‘ Love’ belongs characteristically in the 
Holy Trinity to the Holy Spirit; who ‘communicates to us that common 
love by which the Father and His Son love one another’ (de Trin. xv. 17, 
27). Si ergo, he says, proprie aliquid horum trium caritas nuncupanda est, 
quid aptius quam ut hoc sit Spiritus Sanctus? Ut scilicet in illa simplici 
summaque natura non sit aliud substantia et aliud caritas, sed substantia 
ipsa sit caritas, et caritas ipsa sit substantia, sive in Patre sive in Filio, sive 
in Spiritu Sancto, ut tamen proprie Spiritus Sanctus caritas nuncupetur 
(td. 17, 29). 

As answering to this love of God, Creation in its essence and destiny 
reveals not only the will but also the nature of God. As yet there is con- 
flict and disorder, and St John does not, like St Paul (1 Cor. xv. 28), 
distinctly contemplate the end. He lays down the eternal truths which 
must find fulfilment. 

For the same reason the thoughts of judgment and vengeance which are 
prominent in the Apocalypse fall into the background in the Gospel and 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 169 


Epistles. These lie, so to speak, rather in the necessity of things so far as 
they are apart from God than in the will of God. 

In the O. T. love is an attribute of God, one of many exercised in parti- 
cular relations: Deut. iv. 37, vii. 8, 13, x. 15, 18, xxiii, 5; 2 Sam. xii. 25; 
Is. xli. 8, xliii. 4, xlviii. 14; Mal. i. 2. In the N. Τ᾿ first love can be shewn 
to be the very Being of God as answering to the Revelation in Christ; and 
we may see a certain fitness in the fact that this crowning truth is brought 
out in the latest of the apostolic writings. 

In other passages St John speaks of God as ‘living’ (John vi. 57 6 fav 
πατήρ), ‘true’ (ἀληθής John viii. 26, iii. 33; comp. 1 John i. 10), ‘faithful’ 
(πιστός τ John i. 9; Apoc. i. 5, iii. 14, xix. 11), ‘righteous’ (δίκαιος John xvii. 
25; 1 John i. 9; comp. Apoc. xvi. 5), ‘holy’ (ἅγιος John xvii. 11 ; comp. 
Apoc. vi. 10). And he records how His character is shewn to us in His 
action in Nature (John v. 17), History (xi. 4, xix. 11), and Grace (vi. 44 ἢ). 
Comp. John xii. 28, x. 29, xi. 41 f. 


Additional Note on iv. 9. The use of the term μονογενής. 


The term μονογενής is derived from the vocabulary of the txx. It occurs The use of 
there altogether eight times, three times in the Psalms, three times in Tobit, μονογενής, 
once in Judges and once in the book of Wisdom. ‘The use of the word in iam 80 

LXX. 

Tobit is quite simple. Tobit and Sarah are two μονογενεῖς, only children 
of their parents (viii. 17): Sarah is μονογενής (or pia iii. 10) the one daughter 
of her father (iii. 15; cf. vi. 11 where the reading is doubtful). In the 
book of Wisdom the meaning of the term is less easy to express. It is 
said (vii. 22) that in Wisdom there is a spirit intelligent, holy, povoyevés, 
manifold, subtle, versatile... The epithet evidently describes the essential 
nature and not the derivation of this spirit: it is something absolutely one, 
unique (wnicus in Latt.). 

In the three passages of the Psalms, as in Jud. xi. 34, the word repre- 
sents the Hebrew ὙΠ), twice as a significant title of the soul, the one single 
irreparable life of man (Ps. xxii. (xxi.) 21; xxxv. (xxxiv.) 17, unicam meam 
Lat. Vet.; solitartam meam V.), and once of the sufferer left alone and 
solitary in his distress (Ps. xxv. (xxiv.) 16 unicus Lat. Vet.; solus V.; 
and so Aquila rightly in Ps. Ixviii. (Ixvii.) 6 [Lxx. μονοτρόπους), but in 
the three other places he gives μοναχός, which is the rendering of Sym. 
and Theod. here). 

In six other places the same original word (πὸ 18 represented by 
ἀγαπητός (Gen. xxii. 2, 12, 16; Jer. vi. 26; Amos viii. 10; Zech. xii. 10), 
which also carries with it the notion of ‘an only child’; once by ἀγαπώ- 
μενος, Prov. iv. 3. In Jud. xi. 34 Cod. A. gives the duplicate rendering 
μονογενής, ἀγαπητή. 

In the New Testament μονογενής has the same meaning only (Lk. viii. 42 is in the 
unica), or only child (Lk. vii. 12 unicus; ix. 38 id.; Hebr. xi. 17, unicus Vet. N 
Lat. unigenitus V., comp. John i. 14, unict Tert., unigentti most); and 
so the word is used of the Lord (John iii. 16 sei Vet. Lat.; unigenitus 
V.; 1 John iv. 9 unicum Vet. Lat.; unigenitum V.; comp. John i. 14), 
and once, according to the most ancient authorities in connexion with the 


170 


iii, in later 
writings. 


Confes- 
sions 
of Faith. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


word ‘God’ (John i. 18 μονογενὴς θεός; unicus filius, Adim, ap. Aug. ; uni- 
genitus filius (Deus), rell.). 

The oue instance of the use of the word in the sub-apostolic writings 
gives exactly the same sense. Clement speaks of the Phoenix (Ep. 1. 25) as 
μονογενὲς ὑπάρχον, a bird ‘absolutely unique, the only one of its kind’ 
(Comp. Bp Lightfoot ad loc.) 

The word next appears prominently in the system of Valentinus. The 
Mind (Νοῦς) the offspring of the ineffable Depth (Βυθός) and Silence 
(Σιγή), which alone embraced the greatness of the First Father, itself ‘the 
Father and beginning of all things,’ was also called ὁ Μονογενής, the only- 
born. And from this Being ‘like and equal’ to its Author, in conjunction 
with Truth the other Zons proceeded (Iren. i. 1, 2). 

These mystical speculations fixed attention upon the term; but perhaps 
at the same time they checked its technical use in the Church. It does 
not in fact occur in the earlier types of the Creed, which are found in 
Ireneeus, Tertullian and Novatian; and in Tertullian the corresponding 
Latin term unicus is used of God (the Father): de virg. vel. 1; adv. Prax. 2. 
But it is worthy of notice that in the confession of Ignatius before Trajan, 
which follows the great lines of a Baptismal Symbol, the phrase is found: eis 
ἔστιν θεὸς...καὶ εἷς Χριστὸς Ἰησοῦς ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ ὁ μονογενής (Ignat. Mart. 2; 
comp. Polyc. Mart. 20). And it was apparently from Antioch that the 
term spread as an element of the expression of the Catholic F aith. 

In the second half of the third century the word appears in the Con- 
fessions of Syria and Asia Minor (Syn. Ant. a.v. 269, Routh, iii. p. 290; 
Greg. Thaum. ap. Greg. Nyss. 3, p. 912; Lucian, Socr. 2, 10, 7; Apost. 
Const. 7, 41; Marcellus, Epiph. Her. 72, p. 836); and from that time it 
gradually obtained a permanent place in the Creeds of the East and the 
West. 

The earliest certain example of the word in this connexion brings out 
its force very plainly. The Synod of Antioch (269), which condemned Paul 
of Samosata, in giving the exposition of their ancient belief which they 
addressed to him, write: ‘We confess and proclaim the Son as begotten, 
‘an only Son (γεννητόν, υἱὸν μονογενῆ), the image of the unseen God, the 
‘firstborn of all creation, the Wisdom and Word and Power of God, who was 
‘before the ages not by foreknowledge but by essence and subsistence, 
‘God, Son of God, having recognised Him as such both in the Old and New 
‘Testament’ (Routh, Rell. Sacr. iii. 290; comp. Alex. Alexandr. ap. Theodor. 
A. E. τ. 4. 45, φύσις μονογενής). 

The point which is emphasised by the word here is evidently the abso- 
lute oneness of the Being of the Son. He stands to the Father in a 
relation wholly singular. He is the one only Son, the one to whom the 
title belongs in a sense completely unique and peculiar. The thought is 
centred in the Personal existence of the Son, and not in the Generation of 
the Son. That mystery is dealt with in another phrase. Consistently with 
this view the earliest Latin forms of the Creed uniformly represent the 
word by uwnicus, the only son, and not by unigenitus the only-begotten son, 
and this rendering has maintained its place in the Apostles’ Creed and in 
our English version of it. But towards the close of the fourth century in 
translations from the Greek unigenitus came to be substituted for unicus, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 171 


and this interpretation has passed into our version of the Constantino- 
politan Creed (only-begotten). 

The sense of only Son is preserved by the Syriac versions of the Nicene 
Creed, which go back to the original word which was rendered in the Lxx. 
μονογενής and ἀγαπητός (-»1) following in this the example of the Syriac 
translation of the N.T., where the word μονογενής is 80 rendered uniformly : 
Caspari, pp. 101, 116. 

The exact phraseology of the true Nicene Creed separates distinctly 
these two thoughts of the generation of the Son, and of the unique being of 
the Son. ‘We believe...in one Lord Jesus Christ, begotten of the Father 
‘an only Son’ (γεννηθέντα ἐκ πατρὸς μονογενῆ), where the uniqueness of 
nature is further defined by the addition ‘that is to say of the essence of 
‘the Father.’ And this proper sense of the word μονογενής, as marking the 
oneness of the sonship, preserves a close affinity in idea with ἀγαπητός 
well-beloved, the second translation of 17, Both words define that which 
is essentially singular in filial relationship: ‘Only son and well-beloved,’ 
Athanasius writes, ‘are the same’ (Or. 6. Ar. iv. 24). 

But in the interval which elapsed before the council of Constantinople Later in- 
the important distinction between the sonship and the generation of the tetpreta- 
Son was beginning to be obscured, and μονογενής was treated as equivalent Ἰ086: 
to μόνος γεννηθείς, so as to include both the fact of the uniqueness of the 
Nature of the Son and the ground (1 we may so speak) of His uniqueness”. 

In this way the grand simplicity of the original idea of the word was 
lost. Other thoughts, true in themselves, were gathered round it, and at 
last the sense was given by Gregory of Nazianzus as describing ‘not the 
“only Son of an only Parent, at one only time, but also that He was (be- 
‘gotten) in a singular way (μονοτρόπως)᾽ (Orat. xxx.20). And this conception, 
with which no fault can be found except that it is not contained in the 
word, became popularly current afterwards and was admirably expressed 
by John of Damascus: Μονογενὴς δὲ dre μόνος ἐκ μόνου τοῦ πατρὸς μόνως 
ἐγεννήθη (De Fid. Orthod. i. 8. 135). 

One other use of the word μονογενής, which is at first strange to our The 

ears, remains to be noticed. The true reading in Johni. 18 is in all proba- phrase 
bility μονογενὴς θεός (unigenitus Deus), and this phrase occurs in some of 4 rn ee 
the Confessions of the fourth century. Thus it appears in a copy of the “ 
Nicene Creed addressed by Eustathius to Liberius (6. 366), (Socr. iv. 12, 
14), and in a Creed set forth by the council of Antioch in 341 Grarceanes 
..-€ls ἕνα Κύριον Ἶν. Xv. τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ τὸν μονογενῆ θεόν...τὸν γεννηθέντα... 
Socr. ii. 10, 12; Athan. de Syn. 23), which was said in fact to be the 
Creed of Lucian the Martyr; and again in the Synodical letter of the 
Synod of Ancyra (358) (Sozom. 3, 5, 9: Epiph. Har. 73, 8). 

The phrase is common in patristic writings both in connexion with the 
passage in St John’s Gospel and independently. Didymus sets the phrase 


1 There can be no doubt that in this 3 The word μονογεννητός does not 
sentence μονογενῆ is (so to speak) a occur. The instance quoted by Bing- 
secondary predicate, and not a fresh ham (3, 359) from Ussher is simply a 
epithet. The clause is so rendered in false conjunction of the words...uovo- 
the Syriac version; Caspari, p. ror. γενῆ τόν... See Heurtley, pp. 79, 82. 


172 


Differ- 
ence of 

ὁ θεός and 
θεός. 


i. Use in 
St John, 
θεός with- 
out the 
article. 


Use with 
prepo- 
sitions. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


μονογενὴς θεὸς λόγος parallel with εἷς θεός. Alexander, who reads 6 μονο- 
γενὴς υἱός in John i. 18 speaks afterwards of the ‘ineffable subsistence of 
God the only Son’ (θεὸς μονογενής Theod. 1, 4, $§ 15, 19). Gregory of 
Nyssa, who uses it most frequently, says ‘the sum of the Christian religion 
‘is to believe in God the only Son (τὸν μονογενῆ θεόν) who is the Truth and 
‘the true Light and the Power of God and the Life’ (¢. Hunvum. 12, p. 913, 
Migne). 

On the relation of μονογενής to πρωτότοκος as applied to the Son see 
Lightfoot on Col. i. 15; and the typical passage of Athanasius: Orat. c. 
Ar, ii. 21 § 9. In connecting πρωτότοκος with the Incarnate Lord, I 
believe that the great Greek fathers wished to guard the truth which 
I have sought to express in the Essay on ‘The Gospel of Creation,’ 

For the use of the phrase μονογενὴς θεός see Dr Hort’s Tico Disserta- 
tions, Cambridge, 1876. 


Additional Note on iv. 12. On the use of θεός and ὁ θεός. 


A careful examination of the passages, relatively few in number, in 
which θεός is used without the article in St John’s writings leads to the 
conclusion that the difference between ὁ θεός and θεός is such as might 
have been expected antecedently. The former brings before us the Personal 
God Who has been revealed to us in a personal relation to ourselves: the 
latter fixes our thoughts on the general conception of the Divine Character 
and Being. 

i. Θεός occurs without the article (exclusively of cases where it occurs 
with a preposition) in the following passages: 

John i. 1 θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος. 


45 12 τέκνα θεοῦ. Sor John iii. 1, 2. 
5s 18 θεὸν οὐδεὶς ἑώρακεν. 1 John iv. 12 θεὸν οὐδεὶς πώποτε 
τεθέαται. 


» Vii 45 διδακτοὶ θεοῦ (1ΧΧ). 
» Vili 54 λέγετε ὅτι θεὸς ὑμῶν ἐστίν. 
» ΣΧ. 33 ποιεῖς σεαυτὸν θεόν. 
τ 34. εἶπα θεοί ἐστε (LXX). 
» XIX. 7. υἱὸν θεοῦ ἑαυτὸν ἐποίησεν. 
1 John iii. 1, 2 (above John i. 12). 
» siv.12 (above John i. 18). 


2 John 9 θεὸν οὐκ ἔχει. 
Apoe. vii. 2 σφραγῖδα θεοῦ ζῶντος (comp. 1 Thess. i. 9; 2 Cor. iii. 
3, Vi. 16; 1 Tim. iv. 10; Hebr. ix. 14, x. 31, xii. 22). 
» «=XEL 3 ὁ θεὸς per αὐτῶν ἔσται [αὐτῶν θεός]. 
ὰ 7 ἔσομαι αὐτῷ θεός. 


It is clear that in these passages ὁ θεός cither could not be used, or 
could only be used with a serious change of sense. 


The use of ὁ θεός and θεός with prepositions presents some marked 
results. 


1. ἀπό. 


(a) With article: 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 173 


Apoc. xii. 6 τόπον ἡτοιμασμένον ἀπὸ τοῦ 6. 
» XXi. 10 (πόλιν) καταβαίνουσαν ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦ 6. 
(8) Without article: 
John iii. 2 ἀπὸ 6. ἐλήλυθας. 
»» Mii, 3. ἀπὸ 6. ἐξῆλθεν. 
» XVI 30 ἀπὸ 6. ἐξῆλθες. 
2. εἰς. 
John xiv. πιστεύετε εἰς τὸν 6. 
3. ἐκ. 
(a) With article : 
γεννηθῆναι ἐκ τοῦ 6. τ John iii. 9, v. 1, 4, 18. 
εἶναι ἐκ τοῦ 6. John vii. 17, viii. 47 ; 1 John iii. 10, iv. τ ff, 6f., τ. 
19; 3 John 11. 
John viii. 42 ἐκ τοῦ 6. ἐξῆλθον. 
Apoc. xi. 11 πνεῦμα ζωῆς ἐκ τοῦ 6. 
(8) Without article: 
John i. 13 ἐκ θεοῦ ἐγεννήθησαν. 
4. ἐν. 
(a) With article : 
1 John iv. 15 αὐτὸς [μένει] ἐν τῷ 6. 
Pe 16 ἐν τῷ 6. μένει. 
(8) Without article: 
John iii. 21 ἐν 6. ἐστὶν εἰργασμένα. 
5. παρά. 
(a) With article: 
John vi. 46 6 ὧν παρὰ [τοῦ] 6. 
» Vili, 40 ἣν ἤκουσα παρὰ τοῦ 6. 
(8) Without article : 
John i. 6 ἀπεσταλμένος παρὰ 8. 
» IX. 16 οὐκ ἔστιν οὗτος παρὰ 6. 
3 33 εἰ ἦν παρὰ 6. 
2 John 3 εἰρήνη παρὰ θ. πατρός. 
6. πρός. 
Uniformly with the article : 
John i. 1 ἦν πρὸς τὸν 8. 
» Xili. 3 ὑπάγει πρὸς τὸν θ. 
1 John iii. 21 παρρησίαν ἔχομεν πρὸς τὸν θ. 
Apoc. xii. ς ἡρπάσθη πρὸς τὸν θ. 
» ΧΙ. 6 βλασφημίας πρὸς τὸν θ. 

Throughout it will be seen that in θεός the general conception of divinity 
is dominant, and in ὁ θεός that of the One Being in personal relation to 
others. 

ii. The same general difference is observable in the use of the terms in ii. Use in 
the other Books of the N. T. Thus it may be noticed that the article is ee 


uniformly found = hee 
(1) with ἐνώπιον (ἔναντι, κατενώπιον, κατέναντι) (31 times) except positions. 


2 Cor. ii. 17. 


174 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


(2) with πρός ace. (19 times). 

(3) with ὑπό gen. (13 times) except Rom. xiii. 1; Gal. iv. 9. 
On the other hand the article is never used with κατά acc. (6 times), while 
it is used in the two places where xara is used with gen. 


Examples A few illustrations will serve to make this difference felt : 
of usages Acts v. 4 οὐκ ἐψεύσω ἀνθρώποις ἀλλὰ τῷ θεῷ. 


- 29 πειθαρχεῖν δεῖ θεῷ μᾶλλον ἢ ἀνθρώποις. 
ΒΗ 53 κ᾿ Ἥρα See > a - χὰ 
go Vii. 55 εἶδεν δόξαν θεοῦ καὶ Ιησοῦν ἑστῶτα ἐκ δεξιῶν τοῦ θεοῦ. 
» Xiv. 15 ἐπιστρέφειν ἐπὶ θεὸν ζῶντα. 
΄ ἥξ. ἐς - + a > a 2% τὰ , 
» XV. IQ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ἐθνῶν ἐπιστρέφουσιν ἐπὶ τὸν θεόν. 
Comp. 1 Tim. iv. 10 and 2 Cor. i. 9. 
Acts xx. 21 τὴν εἰς θεὸν μετάνοιαν. 
» XXiv. 15 ἐλπίδα ἔχειν εἰς τὸν θεόν. 
1 Thess. i. 9 ἐπεστρέψατε πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ἀπὸ τῶν εἰδώλων δουλεύειν θεῷ 
ζῶντι καὶ ἀληθινῷ. 
li, 13 εὖ ῦ ῷ θεῷ... ὅτι παραλαβόντες λόγον axon 
.. 13 εὐχαριστοῦμεν τῷ θεῷ....ὅτι παρ ς Ney ἤθους 
τοῦ θεοῦ ἐδέξασθε οὐ λόγον ἀνθρ. ἀλλὰ ..λόγον θεοῦ. 
εἴς i ie ey ὅ.. ἢ 
1 Cor. iii. IQ μωρία mapa τῷ θεῷ ἐστιν. 
Ἦν a : ee 
» ὙΠ. 24 ἐν τούτῳ μενέτω mapa θεῷ. 
Rom. ii. 17 καυχᾶσαι ἐν θεῷ. 
11 καυχώμενοι ἐν τῷ θεῷ. 


7) 


27 

In this connexion also, though other considerations come in here, the 

following parallel phrases deserve notice: εὐαγγέλιον θεοῦ Rom. i. 1; τὸ 

evayy. τοῦ 6. Rom. xv. 16; δικαιοσύνη θεοῦ 2 Cor. v. 21; ἡ δικ. τοῦ 6. Rom. 

X. 3; ὀργὴ θεοῦ Rom. i. 18; ἡ ὀργὴ τοῦ 6. John iii. 36, Eph. v. 6; ἀλήθεια 
θεοῦ Rom. xv. 8; ἡ ἀλήθ. τοῦ 6. Rom. i. 25, iii. 7. 


Additional Note on iv. 15. Divine Fellowship. 


The fact of the divine fellowship is presented by St John in different 
for ms. 

1. Sometimes it is set forth in its reciprocal fulness : 

ili. 24, he that keepeth (ὁ τηρῶν) His commandments abideth in Him 
(6 θεός) and He in him. 

iv. 13, hereby we perceive that we abide in Him and He in us, 
because He hath given us of His Spirit. 

iv. 15, whosoever shall confess that Jesus [Christ] is the Son o God, 
God abideth in him and he in God. 

iv. 16, God is love, and he that abideth in love abideth in God, and 
God [abideth] in him. 

With these passages in which the divine fellowship is described as a 
fellowship with ‘God,’ must be compared those in which it is described asa 
fellowship with Christ : 

John vi. 56, he that eateth (ὁ τρώγων) my flesh and drinketh my blood 
abideth in Me and I in him. 

John xiv. 20, in that day ye shall know (γνώσεσθε) that Iam in my 
Father, and ye in Me, and I in you. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


John xv. 5 he that abideth in Me and I in him, the same beareth 
much fruit. 

It will be observed that, with one exception (c. iv. 15), the ‘dwelling’ 
or ‘being’ of man in Gud is placed first (iii. 24, iv. 13, 16; comp. 
ii, 24; John vi. 56, xiv. 20, xv. 5). The ascension to heaven, if we 
may so speak, generally precedes the transfiguration of earth. 

2. Sometimes again the divine fellowship is regarded in one of its two 
aspects : 

(a) The abiding (being) of man in God (or Christ) : 

li, 5, in this we know (γινώσκομεν) that we are in Him. 

li. 6, he that saith he abideth in Him ought himself also to walk 
even as He walked. 

iii. 6, every one that abideth in Him sinneth not. 

v. 20, we know (οἴδαμεν) that the Son of God hath cvme...and we 
are in Him that is true (ἐν τῷ ἀληθινῷ). 

Compare John xv. 4 (ye cannot bear fruit) except ye abide in Me. 

ii. 28, abide in Him that if He shall be manifested we may have 
boldness... 

(8) The abiding (being) of God (or Christ) in man: 

iii. 24, hereby we know (γινώσκομεν) that He abideth in us, from 
the Spirit which He gave us. 

iv. 12, if we love one another God abideth in us... 

John xvii. 22 ἢ, the glory which Thou hast given Me I hace given 
unto them; that they may be one, even as We are one; Tin 
them, and Thou in Me... 

Jobn xvii. 26, J made known unto them Thy Name...that the love 
wherewith Thou lovedst Me may be in them and I in them. 

It is of interest to examine these several passages as illustrating the 
efficient cause, the conditions, the sign, the results of this fellowship of man 
with God. 

(a) The efficient cause: the recognition of the revelation of God 
in Christ, of the Glory and the Name of the Father: John xvii. 22f, 

26, xiv. 20; 1 John Vv. 20. 

(8) The conditions: confession, iv. 15; obedience, iii. 24, ii. 6; love, 

iv. 16. These are summed up in the thought of participation in 

Christ’s Humanity, John vi. 56. 

(y) The sign: the possession of the Spirit of God, iii. 24; which shews 

itself as the source of obedience, ii. 5; and of love, iv. 12 f. 

(δ) The results: fruitfulness, John xv. 4 f.; confidence, 1 John ii. 28; 

guilelessness, iii. 6. 

The use of the terms ‘abiding’ and ‘being’ is also suggestive : 

(a) abide: ii. 6, 28, iii. 6, 24, iv. 12f,, 15 f.; John vi. 56, xv. 4f. 
(Ὁ) be: ii. 5, v. 20; John xiv. 20, xvii. 23, 26. 

In this connexion Basil’s remark is of interest that the Spirit is spoken 
of ‘as the place of those that are sanctified.’ ‘The Spirit,’ he goes on to 
say, ‘is the place of the saints; and the saint is a place appropriate to the 
‘Spirit...’ (de Spir. 5. xxvi. § 62). 


175 


176 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V1 


~ Sf -~ ᾽ \ LS 
V. 'fla@s ὃ πιστεύων ὅτι ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐστὶν ὁ χριστος 


Il. Tue Power or THE CHRISTIAN 
Lire: tae Victory aNd WIT- 
NESS OF Fartit (v. 1- 12). 

The whole of this section is closely 
connected, but two main thoughts, 
‘Faith’ and ‘ Witness, respectively 
prevail in the opening and closing 
verses. Thus it may be divided into 
two parts, 

1. The victory of Faith (1—5). 

2. The Divine Witness (6—12 ) 


1. The victory of Faith (v. 1—5). 

In the last section it has been seen 
that the love of ‘the brethren’ is en- 
joined as an essential accompaniment 
of the love of God. St John now 
traces the foundations of spiritual 
kinsmanship. ‘Brethren’ are united 
by ἃ common Divine Father. The 
human condition of this union is faith 
in Jesus as the Christ. This faith is 
able to overcome and has potentially 
overcome every force of the world, 
The succession of thought is clearly 
marked. Faith is the sign of a new 
life, and the presence of this life in- 
volves love for all who share it (1). 
The reality of this love is shewn by 
active obedience (2, 3). Such obedi- 
ence is made possible by the gift of a 
Divine life, a truth which is affirmed 
in the abstract, and also in regard to 
the Life of Christ (4), and in regard to 
the experience of the believer (5). 

* Every one that believes that Jesus 
is the Christ is begotten of God, and 
every one that loveth him that begat 
loceth him that is begotten of him. 
?In this we know that we love the 
children of God, when we love God 
and do his commandments ; 3 for this 
ts the love of God, that we observe his 
commandments, and his command- 
ments are not grievous; ‘because 
everything that is begotten of God 
overcometh the world; and this is 
the victory that overcame the world, 
even our faith. 5[ Yea,] who is he 


that overcometh the world but he that 
believeth that Jesus is the Son of God? 

1. The transition from the former 
section lies in the thought of brother- 
hood. Brotherhood is founded on the 
vital apprehension of the revelation of 
Christ given by God. It is not then 
an arbitrary command that he who 
loves God love his brother also. He 
must doso. For he consciously shares 
with every brother the principle of 
his new being. 

Πᾶς ὁ πιστεύων] Comp. ¢. iii. 3. 

The verb πιστεύειν is here used for 
the first time in the epistle in its full 
and definite sense. In iv. 16 it de- 
scribes a general position with regard 
to the Divine purpose. In iii. 23 it 
expresses a belief in the truth of the 
revelation as to Christ. Here it pre- 
sents that belief in a direct and per- 
sonal form. ‘He that believeth that 
Jesus is the Christ’ not only admits 
an intellectual truth but enters into a 
direct relation with the powers of a 
spiritual order. ‘The command’ of 
God (iii. 23) finds so far an individual 
accomplishment. 

In the former chapter (iv. 2, 15; 
comp. ii. 23), St John has spoken of 
the ‘confession’ of Christ in relation 
to society: here he speaks of faith 
in relation to the single believer. 
The main thought there was of the 
recognition, here of the essence of the 
children of God. The forms of con- 
fession are given in the most explicit 
form. The article of faith is given 
more simply. A living faith carries 
with it more than the exact terms of 
specific belief convey (John xi. 27). 

Compare tv. 5, 10, 13. 

Such faith involves the present ac- 
tion of a new and Divine life, which 
must have a Divine origin. Comp. 
1 Cor. xii. 3. Faith here is regarded 
simply as the sign of the life which 
has been given. Nothing is said of 
the relation between the human and 


V. 2] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


177 


> ΕΝ “ , \ ~ a \ 
ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ γεγέννηται, Kal πᾶς ὁ ἀγαπῶν τὸν γεννή- 


> ἊΝ ‘ 7 - 
σαντα ἀγαπᾷ Tov γεγεννημένον ἐξ αὐτοῦ. 


I dy. τὸν yey. Β vg the: ἀγ-Ἐ καὶ' τὸν yey. (δὰ) A syrr. 


the Divine—the faith of man, and ‘the 
seed of God’ (iii. 9)—in the first quick- 
ening of life. Comp. John i. 12 note. 

ὅτι “I. ἐστὶν ὁ χριστός] Comp. v. 5 
ὅτι Ἶ. ἐστὶν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ. John xx. 
31 ὅτι Ἶ. ἐστὶν ὁ χριστὸς ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ 
θεοῦ. For the choice of the exact 
terms of belief here, see ii. 22. 

ἐκ τοῦ θ. γεγ. See ὁ. iii. g note. 

καὶ πᾶς 6 ay. τ. γενν.] et omnis qui 
diligit eum qui genuit V., and every 
one that loveth Him that begat... It 
is assumed that the child will have 
love for the Author of his being. 
Love follows directly from life. And 
in this spiritual connexion love must 
be directed to the character, and not 
to the Person apart from the charac- 
ter. It follows therefore that it will 
be extended to all those to whom the 
character has been communicated. 

ὁ ἀγαπῶν] Augustine brings out the 
necessary connexion between faith 
and love (faith in action): cum dilec- 
tione, fides Christiani: sine dilectione, 
fides dzemonis. 

τὸν yevv.] The word is used also of 
the human agent, Philem. ro. 

τὸν γεγενν. ἐξ αὐτοῦ) eum qui na- 
tus est ex eo V., him that hath been 
begotten of Him, the child who draws 
from Him the abiding principle of 
his life. The singular (contrast ‘the 
children’ Ὁ. 2) emphasises the direct 
relation of Father and child, and also 
of brother and brother. This relation, 
as here regarded, is personal and not 
social. 

Throughout the Epistle St John 
individualises: ii. 4 ff, 9 ff, 15, 17, 
22 f., 29; iii 3 ff, 9 f., 15, 17. 

The idea of Augustine that the re- 
ference is to Christ is foreign to the 
context. 

2. What then, it may be asked, is 
the sign of this spiritual love which 


W. J. 


a2 f 
εν TOUTW 
τὸν yey.: τὸ yey. &. 


is essentially different from a natural 
preference? The love of the children 
of God, such is the answer, is attested 
by the love of God, that is, by obe- 
dience to God. At first sight this 
answer seems simply to invert the 
terms of the statement which has 
been made already. The love of God 
and the love of the children of God 
do in fact include each the other. It 
is equally true to say ‘He who loves 
God loves the children of God, and 
to say ‘He who loves the children of 
God loves God’ Hither form of love 
may be made the ground or the con- 
clusion in the argument. But in re- 
ality the test of the love of the bre- 
thren given here introduces a new 
idea. The will of Christians is essen- 
tially the will of God (comp. iii. 22). 
The effort to fulfil the commandments 
of God is consequently the effort to 
do that which our ‘brethren’ most 
desire to be done: the proof of love. 

Bede says well: Ille solus recte 
proximum diligere probatur qui et 
Conditoris amore flagrare conspicitur . 

It will also be further observed that 
the passage stands in close convexion 
with ὁ. ii. 3 in this we perceive that 
we know Him if we keep His com- 
mandments ; and with 111, 23 this is 
His commandment that we believe 
the Name...and love one another... 
(comp. iv. 20). 

Obedience to the manifold com- 
mandments of God (ai évrodai), the 
active fulfilment of Christian duty, is 
the sign of a knowledge of God: and 
knowledge of God is love of God. 

And again, the one commandment 
of God (ἡ ἐντολή) is that we believe 
the Name of His Son and love one 
another. 

Here the love of God and obedi- 
ence in detail, which is identical with 


12 


178 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V. 2 


ὶ 5 a \ t - a «“ 

γινώσκομεν ὅτι ἀγαπῶμεν τὰ τέκνα τοῦ θεοῦ, ὅταν 
΄ ‘ ? \ ΄ ΄ 

τὸν θεὸν ἀγαπῶμεν καὶ τὰς ἐντολάς αὐτοῦ ποιώμεν" 


2 ποιῶμεν B vg (me the syrr): τηρῶμεν & (lat). 


it (v. 3), is given as the sign of the 
reality of love for the brethren, who 
are the children of God. 

This thought that the love of God 
is obedience to His commandments 
is the uniting thought in the three 
passages. It is clearly seen through 
this how we can say (now more com- 
pletely than before): ‘We love God 
and keep His commandments, and 
therefore we love the brethren’; or 
‘We love the brethren, and therefore 
we love God and keep His command- 
ments. Whichever proposition is es- 
tablished, the other follows from it. 
Comp. 6. i. 3. 

At the same time the transference 
of the test of the love of the brethren 
to a spiritual region enables the be- 
liever to discern (γινώσκομεν) the re- 
ality of his love in spite of the many 
differences which separate him from 
the cbject of it under the conditions 
of earthly life. 

ἐν τούτῳ...] in this .. The percep- 
tion comes not as a conviction drawn 
from a state of obedient love (ἐκ 
τούτου, from this), but in the very 
exercise of the feeling. The ‘this,’ as 
elsewhere, seems to look backward at 
once and forward, to the fact and to 
the manifestation of the love of God. 
Comp. ii. 3 note. 

γινώσκομεν] cognoscimus V., we 
know, perceive. The conviction is 
brought home to us in the present 
interpretation of the facts of life. 
Compare ii. 3 note, 5, 18; iii. 24 (V. 
scimus) ; iv. 13 (V. intellegimus) ; and 
contrast the use of οἴδαμεν in iii. 2, 5, 
14 f.; v. 15, 18 ff. (V. scimus, scitis), 
See v.18 note. The use of ὅταν brings 
into prominence the immediate and 
continuous exercise of this power of 
knowledge. 

ἀγαπῶμεν] The love which is spoken 


2, 3 om. ποιῶμεν... αὐτοῦ A. 


of is that of Christian for Christian 
as Christian, a feeling which has to 
be distinguished from human affec- 
tion. Of this love, which belongs to 
the spiritual sphere, love to God, that 
is obedience to God, is necessarily a 
final criterion. 

τὰ τέκνα τοῦ 6.) natos Dei V., the 
children of God. Comp. iii. 1 note. 
St John does not say ‘brethren’ here, 
because the argument turns upon the 
relation of Christians to God and not 
upon their relation to one another. 
At the same time the plural follows 
naturally on the singular of 7.1. Then 
the thought was of the individual 
realisation of the divine sonship: 
here the thought is of the general, 
social, duty. 

This is the only place where ὅταν 
occurs in the Epistles of St John. 
With the present conj. it expresses 
either an action repeated indefinitely 
(John viii. 44, ix. 5, &c.), or an action 
at an indefinite time regarded as 
actually going on (John vii. 27 ἔρχηται, 
contrast Ὁ. 31 ἔλθῃ; xvi. 21 τίκτῃ fol- 
lowed by γεννήσῃ). Comp. 1 Cor. xv. 
24 (παραδιδοῖ, καταργήσῃ). 

ὅταν... ἀγαπῶμεν] cum...diligamus, 
V. The literal rendering ‘when- 
ever we love’ makes the meaning 
clear, Each act of love to God, that 
is practically, each act of obedience, 
carries with it the fresh conviction of 
true love to the children of God. 
‘Edy (c. ii, 3; John xiii. 35) gives the 
general condition: dra», the particu- 
lar and repeated fulfilment of it. 

The change of order (comp. iii. 4) 
in the objects (άγαπ. τὰ τέκνα, ὅταν τὸν 
θ. ἀγαπ. καὶ τὰς ἐντ. ποι.) corresponds 
with a natural change in emphasis: 
“We know that we love the brethren, 
when God is the end of our affection 
and His commands the guide of our 


V. 3, 4] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


179 


3 a ΄ > € ᾽ ω - ~ ὧἶἱ \ > ‘ 
αὕτη yap ἐστιν ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ θεοῦ iva τὰς ἐντολὰς 


> box - \ © 9 \ ? os - ᾿ > 7 
αὐτου τήρωμεν, Kat αἱ ἐντολαὶ αὐτοῦ βαρεῖαι OUK ELOLV, 


, ~ \ , κῶν a a \ 
ὅτι πᾶν TO γεγεννημένον ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ νικᾷ τὸν κόσμον. 


action” In other cases where the 
object stands before the verb a similar 
shade of meaning is seen: 6.9. ii. 20; 
iv. 9, 12; V. 9. 

καὶ tas ἐντ. αὐτοῦ mot.] et man- 
data eius faciamus V., and do His 
commandments. This clause brings 
the love of God into the region of 
active life. The phrase itself is unique 
(Apoc. xxii. 14 is a false reading); 
and seems to be chosen in order to 
express the active energy of obedi- 
ence as positive and not only nega- 
tive. Comp. ὁ. 1. 6 π. τὴν ἀλήθειαν 
note. 

Augustine follows out his false in- 
terpretation of ‘him that is begotten 
of Him’ in ov. 1 by a striking applica- 
tion here: Filios Dei dixit qui Fili- 
um Dei paulo ante dicebat, quia filii 
Dei corpus sunt unici Filii Dei; et 
cum ille caput nos membra unus est 
Filius Dei. 

He also adds a wider application of 
the principle: Omnes homines, etiam 
inimicos vestros, diligatis, non quia 
sunt fratres, sed ut fratres sint; ut 
semper fraterno amore flagretis sive 
in fratrem factum, sive in inimicum 
ut frater fiat diligendo. 

3. αὕτη ydp...] for this... The 
words give an explanation of the 
second clause (and do His command- 
ments) in the former verse. Love 
of God can only be shewn in the 
effort to fulfil His will. Comp. John 
Xiv. 15, 21, 31. 

ἵνα...τηρῶμεν καὶ...} ut custodiamus 
V. The love of God is not simply 
the keeping (τήρησις, τὸ τηρεῖν) of 
the commandments of God, but rather 
a continuous and watchful endeavour 
to observe them. Comp. John vi. 29 
ἵνα πιστεύητε, xvii. 3 ἵνα γιν.. 2 John 6. 
And the nature of the command- 
ments is not such as to crush the 


freedom and spontaneity of love. 
They are not grievous, heavy (βαρεῖαι, 
gravia V.),an oppressive and exhaust- 
ing burden. Compare Matt. xi. 30 
τὸ φορτίον μου ἐλαφρόν ἐστιν, and 
contrast Matt. xxiii, 4 δεσμεύουσιν 
φορτία βαρέα. 

4. ὅτι...] because... Comp. ii. 19 
note. The fact that the divine com- 
mandments are not a burden is not 
established by a consideration of their 
character. In themselves they are 
difficult (Acts xiv. 22; John xvi. 33). 
To love the brethren is not a light 
thing. But with the commandment 
comes also the power of fulfilment. 
Natural taste, feeling, judgment may 
check spiritual sympathy; but every 
faculty and power which is quickened 
by God is essentially stronger than 
‘the world’ and realises its victory 
at once. 

In the development of the thought 
St John passes from the abstract (πᾶν 
τὸ yeyevv.) to the concrete and per- 
sonal (ris ἐστιν ὁ νικῶν), through the 
decisive history in which the truth 
was once for all absolutely realised 
(ἡ νίκη ἡ νικήσασα). 

πᾶν τὸ γεγ.] St John chooses the 
abstract form (contrast Ὁ. I τὸν yey.) 
in order to convey an universal truth. 
The thought is not so much of the 
believer in his unity, nor of the 
Church, but of each element included 
in the individual life and in the life of 
the society. Compare John iii. 6 τὸ 
yey. and John iii. ὃ πᾶς ὁ yey. 

νικᾷ τὸν κι) conquers the world— 
not ‘hath conquered’ (e. ii. 13 f, iv. 4), 
nor yet ‘will conquer ’—in a struggle 
which is present and continuous. 
Under the title ‘the world’ St John 
gathers up the sum of all the limited, 
transitory powers opposed to God 
which make obedience difficult. It 


12—2 


180 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V. 5 


oS ΄ \ f « [ἢ 
καὶ αὕτη ἐστὶν ἢ νίκη ἡ νικήσασα TOV κόσμον, ἡ πίστις 
og A - \ ἢ ᾽ A € 
nuove ὅτίς ἐστιν [δὲ] ὁ νικῶν τὸν κοσμον εἰ μὴ O 
ὰ oS ~ \ εν ΄σ we 
πιστείων ὅτι ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐστὶν ὁ υἱὸς Tov θεοῦ; 


5 τίς ἐστιν δέ Β (lat): τίς δέ ἐστιν δὲ (lat) syrhl me: τίς ἐστιν A vg. 


is by the introduction of the spiritual, 
the eternal, that we obtain a true 
standard for things, and so can over- 
come the temptations which spring 
out of a narrow, earthly, temporal 
estimate. And this holds good not 
only of man as a whole but of each 
power and faculty with which he is 
endowed. Comp. John xvi. 33. 

καὶ av7y...| The certainty of the 
victory of that which partakes of the 
Divine is illustrated by a view of the 
nature of the victory itself. The 
victory which the Christian is ever 
winning is the individual appropria- 
tion of a victory gained once for all. 

ἡ νίκη...ἡ πίστις ἡμῶν] the victory 
...our faith, The word νίκη occurs here 
only in the N.T., and πίστις here 
only in St John’s Epistles. πίστις 
is not found in St John’s Gospel. 
It occurs in the Apocalypse: 11. 13, 
19; xiii. 10; xiv. 12. In ii. 13, xiv. 
12 it appears to be used objectively 
for ‘the faith of Christ,’ as embodied 
in a confession (‘fides quee creditur’) : 
in ii. 19, xiii. 10, it is the subjective 
spirit of the true believer (‘fides 
qua creditur’). Here the sense is 
fixed by the context. ‘Our faith’ is 
the faith which is summed up in the 
confession that Jesus is ‘the Christ, 
the Son of God’ The Life represented 
by that creed was the victory over 
the world as Christ Himself inter- 
preted it (John xvi. 33). To hold that 
faith, to enter into the meaning and 
the power of that conquest through 
apparent failure, is to share in its 
triumph. Our faith is not merely 
victorious: it is the embodiment of 
the victory which overcame the world. 
Thus the aorist (ἡ νικήσασα, gue vin- 
cit V., inadequately) receives its full 


force. The victory of Christ was gain- 
ed upon a narrow field, but it was 
world-wide in its effects. Comp. Ign. 
ad Sm. 10 ἡ τελεία πίστις, Ἰησοῦς 
Χριστός, and Col. ii. 2 εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν 
τοῦ μυστηρίου τοῦ θεοῦ, Χριστοῦ. 

5. τίς ἐστιν... At length the ques- 
tion becomes directly personal. St 
John appeals to the experience of 
those whom he addresses. The single 
believer (ὁ νικῶν) takes the place of 
the abstract element (τὸ γεγεννημένον), 
and of the absolute force (ἡ πίστις). 
The victory of the divine principle is, 
as he triumphantly claims, actually 
realised in the victory of the Chris- 
tian. 

τίς... «εἰ pn...) Compare ii. 22. The 
personal victory is regarded in its 
course (ὁ νικῶν), as the representative 
victory was regarded in its completion 
(ἡ ν. ἡ νικήσασα). 

ὅτι Ἰ. ἐστὶν ὁ vi. τοῦ 6.] Comp. 2. I. 
By the use of the title ‘the Son of 
God’ in connexion with the human 
name, Jesus, the antithesis involved 
in the faith is expressed in the sharp- 
est form. There is a similar passage 
from ‘the Christ’ to ‘the Son’ in ii. 
22 ff. 


2. The Divine Witness (v. 6—12). 


The victory of Faith has been 
shewn to lie in the confession of Jesus 
as the Son of God. St John now goes 
on to unfold the character (6—8), 
and the effectiveness (9--- 12), of the 
witness by which this confession is 
sustained and justified. 

6—8. The character of the witness 
to the substance of the Christian 
Faith is laid open by a consideration 
of the historical witness which is of- 
ferred to men in the Life of Christ, and 


V. 6] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


181 


- t \ of \ «ἢ ἐρᾷ 
ὁΟὗτοός ἐστιν ὁ ἐλθὼν δι᾽ ὕδατος καὶ αἵματος, ᾿Ιησοῦς 


6 καὶ αἵματος B vg syrvg: +xal πνεύματος NA (lat) me the syrhl (others sub- 


stitute πν. for aly. and some read καὶ mv. καὶ αἵμ.). 
*Is ὁ Xs & syrhl. See Additional Note. 


in the life of the Church (6 a, 0); 
of the divine principle of witness 
(6c); and of the personal witnesses 
(7, 8). 

° This is He that came by water 
and blood, Jesus Christ ; not in the 
water only, but in the water and 
in the blood. And the Spirit is that 
which beareth witness, because the 
Spirit is the Truth. 7 Because three 
are they that bear witness, *the Spirit 
and the water and the blood; and the 
three are for the one. 

6. The two parts of the historical 
witness to Christ are distinguished 
by the different forms in which the 
common outward symbols are used in 
corresponding clauses. He came ‘by 
water and blood, and again ‘not in 
the water only, but in the water and 
in the blood, 

Οὗτος... The pronoun goes back to 
the subject of the last sentence. 
“ This ‘ Jesus,’ who has been affirmed 
to be ‘the Son of God, its He that 
came...” The compound title at the 
end of the clause, Jesus Christ, em- 
phasises the truth which is estab- 
lished by the manner of the ‘coming’ 
of ‘Jesus’: ‘ This is He that came...’ 
and whose Divine Office is expressed 
by the full name which He bears, 
even Jesus Christ. 

ὁ é\Odv...] He that came... The 
verb is used with a clear reference to 
the technical sense of ‘he that cometh’ 
(6 ἐρχόμενος Matt. xi. 3; Luke vii. 
19 f.; comp. John i. 15, 27; vi. 14; 
xi. 27; xii. 13; see also John i. 30; 
x. 8). Thus ‘He that came’ is equiva- 
lent to ‘He that fulfilled the pro- 
mises to the fathers, as the Saviour 
sent from God’ Comp. ii. 18 note. 

δι’ ὕδατος καὶ αἵματος] per aguam et 


Ts Xs NAB: Xs Ἶς the: 


sanguinem V., by (through) water 
and blood. The sense of ‘He that 
came, which distinctly points to a 
past historic fact, determines that 
these terms also must have a historic 
meaning, and refer to definite events 
characteristic of the manner in which 
the Lord fulfilled His office upon 
earth. ‘He came—He was shewn 
to be the Christ —by water and blood.’ 
‘Water’ and ‘blood’ contributed in 
some way to reveal the nature and 
the fulfilment of His work. 

There can be no doubt that the 
Death upon the Cross satisfies the 
conception of ‘coming by blood.’ 
By so dying the Lord made known 
His work as Redeemer ; and opened 
the fountain of His life tomen. Comp. 
Additional Note on i. 7. 

The ‘coming by water,’ which natu- 
rally corresponds to this final act of 
sacrifice, is the Baptism, whereby 
the Lord declared His purpose ‘to 
Julfil all righteousness’ (Matt. iii. 
15). The water, by Christ’s voluntary 
acceptance of the Baptist’s ministry, 
became the means through which the 
divine purpose was fulfilled (Matt. iii. 
17). The Baptist was sent baptizing 
in water that Christ might be made 
manifest (John i. 31). Even in the 
case of the Lord Baptism is shewn to 
have been the external condition of 
the ‘descent and abiding of the Holy 
Spirit’ (John i. 33 f.); and by His 
Baptism Christ fulfilled for the hu- 
manity which He took to Himself, 
though not for Himself, the condition 
of regeneration. 

But we cannot stop at the refer- 
ence to the cardinal events in the 
Lord’s Life whereby He ‘came by 
water and blood’ in the fulfilment of 


182 


His historic work. While He hung 
upon the Cross, dead in regard to 
mortal life, but still living (see John 
xix. 34 note), He came again ‘by 
water and blood.’ The issue of 
‘blood and water’ from His side 
evidently indicated that He hence- 
forth became for men the source of 
blessing symbolised by the twofold 
stream, and realised in His own 
human life by Baptism and Death 
upon the Cross. The one historic 
coming was shewn to be the founda- 
tion of a continuous spiritual coming; 
and St John saw in this the subject 
of the crucial testimony which he had 
to give (John xix. 35). 

Compare the fragment of Claudius 
Apollinaris (Routh, Rell. i. 161) ὁ ἐκ- 
xéas ἐκ τῆς πλευρᾶς αὐτοῦ τὰ δύο ma- 
λιν καθάρσια ὕδωρ καὶ αἷμα, λόγον καὶ 
πνεῦμα (the Gospel of the Incarnate 
Word and the sanctifying presence of 
the Spirit). 

This exceptional note of the Evan- 
gelist seems to place the reference 
here to the significant fact recorded 
in the Gospel beyond question. The 
readers of the Epistle could not but 
be familiar with the incident either 
from the oral or from the written 
teaching of the Apostle; and conscious 
of the stress which he laid upon it, 
as the confirmation of Christian faith, 
they could not fail to recall it here. 

Compare Bede: Nec reticendum 
quod in hoc quoque sanguis et aqua 
testimonium illi dederunt quod de 
latere mortui vivaciter effluxerunt, 
quod erat contra naturam corporum 
mortuorum, atque ob id mysteriis 
aptum et testimonio veritatis fuit 
congruum, videlicet insinuans quia et 
ipsum Domini corpus melius post 
mortem esset victurum resuscitatum 
in gloria et ipsa mors illius nobis vitam 
donaret, 

Such an extension of the meaning 
of ‘water and blood’ appears to be 
implied in the words that follow: 
not in the water only, but in the 
water and in the blood, followed by 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V. 6 


the reference to the present witness 
of the Spirit. The change of the 
preposition, the use of the article, 
and the stress Jaid on actual experi- 
ence, shew that St John is speaking 
of a continuation of the first coming 
under some new but analogous form. 
Further, it is to be noticed that what 
was before spoken of in its unity 
(δ v. καὶ ai.) is now spoken of in its 
separate parts (ἐν τῷ ὕ. καὶ ἐν TO 
αἷμ.). The first proof ‘of the Messiah- 
ship of Jesus lay in His complete 
historical fulfilment of Messiah’s work 
once for all in bringing purification 
and salvation: that proof is continued 
in the experience of the Church in 
its two separate parts. 

Thus we are led to the ideas 
which underlie the two sacraments, 
and which are brought home to us in 
and through them: the ideas which 
in their most general form are laid 
open in John iii, vi. It is through 
Christ’s ‘coming by water and blood,’ 
and His Life through Death, that the 
life of the Spirit and the cleansing 
and support: of our human life in all 
its fulness are assured. The actual 
experience of these blessings is the 
abiding witness of the Church to Him. 

Bede, probably following Augus- 
tine, whose Commentary is not ex- 
tant after v. 3, well combines the 
historic and sacramental references : 
Qui cenit per aquam et sanguinem, 
aquam videlicet lavacri et sanguinem 
suze passionis: non solum baptizari 
propter nostram ablutionem dignatus 
est, ut nobis baptismi sacramentum 
consecraret ac traderet, verum etiam 
sanguinem suum dedit pro nobis, sua 
nos passione redimens, cujus sacra- 
mentis semper refecti nutriremur ad 
salutem. 

διά.. ἐν...1 The historic Mission of 
Christ—the pledge of His Presence— 
was established ‘through’ the car- 
dinal events of His Ministry. The 
abiding presence of Christ—the issue 
of His Mission—is realised ‘in’ that 
which is appointed to perpetuate 


Υ͂. 6] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


183 


eas 2 ἕν κὧ'ὶ “ » βὰς ἐν 
Χριστός" οὐκ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι μόνον ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι καὶ 


2 ~ ov τ ἊΝ 7 ‘ - f x 
εν τω αἰματι" καὶ TO πῖνευμα ἐστιν TO μαρτυρουν, OTL TO 


μόνον : μόνῳ B. 


others read αἵματι... πνεύματὴ. 
(Not Ambr. Fulg.) 


the power of His work. The one 
preposition marks the means by 
which Christ’s office was revealed : 
the other the sphere in which He 
continues to exercise it. 

δ᾽ ὕδατος καὶ αἷμ.) The order is 
significantly changed from that in 
the Gospel (blood and water). The 
order in the Gospel is (so to speak) 
the order of the divine gift: the full 
power of human life comes first: that 
in the Epistle is the order of the 
human appropriation of the gift. 

The symbolism of ‘blood’ as re- 
presenting the natural human life 
sacrificed and so made available for 
others, has been already touched 
upon. In contrast with this, ‘water’ 
represents the power of the spiritual 
life : John iii. 5; iv. 14; vii. 38 (Zech. 
xiv. 8). Comp. Apoc. xxi. 6; xxii. 1, 17. 

οὐκ ἐν τῷ UO. p.] not in the water 
only. The reference is probably to 
such teachers as Irenzeus mentions 
(i. 26, 1): [Cerinthus docuit] post 
baptismum descendisse in eum (Iesum) 
ab ea principalitate que est super 
omnia Christum figura columbee; et 
tune annunciasse incognitum Patrem 
et virtates perfecisse: in fine autem 
revolasse iterum Christum de Jesu et 
Jesum passum esse et regurrexisse ; 
Christum autem impassibilem perse- 
verasse, existentem spiritalem. In 
some form or other the same kind of 
error is always repeating itself. The 
spiritual life is exalted into an undue 
supremacy, to the neglect of the re- 
demption of the earthly life. 

For this reason St John says οὐκ 
ἐν τῷ 0d. μόνον, and not οὐ δι’ vs. μόνον. 
He contradicts a false view of Christ's 
abiding work and not only a false 
view of Christ’s Person in Himself. 


αἵματι SB vg me the syrr: πνεύματι A (some add πνεύματι, 





τὸ πνεῦμα (2°): Χριστός vg. Perhaps xpc for sps. 


καὶ τὸ πν....] and the Spirit... In 
the words which immediately precede 
St John has indicated a present action 
of Christ. He now shews how the 
reality of that action is established. 
The Spirit—the Divine Spirit—is 
that which witnesseth, not ‘which 
witnessed’ (3 John 6), or ‘ which hath 
witnessed’ (v. 9). His testimony is 
given now and uninterruptedly. Such 
‘witness’ is the peculiar office of the 
Spirit (John xiv. 26; xv. 26; xvi. 
8 ff). By this it is that men are 
enabled to pierce beneath the ex- 
ternal phenomena and the external 
rites to their innermost meaning. 
Nothing is said of the substance of 
the witness or of those to whom it is 
given. These details are included in 
the idea of the Spirit’s witness. He 
speaks of Divine Truth; and He 
speaks to the souls of believers. 

Thus there is, as will be seen, 
a striking parallelism between the 
office of Christ and the office of the 
Spirit. Jesus is He that came, once 
for all fulfilling the Messiah’s work ; 
and the Spirit ts that which beareth 
witness, ever applying and interpret- 
ing His Mission and His gifts. 

ὅτι τὸ πνεῦμα... guoniam (quod) 
Christus V., because the Spirit... The 
conjunction (ὅτι) has been interpreted 
both as giving the substance (that) 
and as giving the reason (because) of 
the testimony. The former translation 
gives no tolerable sense unless the 
Latin reading of Christ for the Spirit 
is adopted. But the sense thus gained 
is foreign to the context. While then 
we take the translation because as cer- 
tainly right, the meaning of the word 
is ambiguous here. It may mean: 
The Spirit gives the witness (1) be- 


184 


a ᾽ , 
πνεῦμα ἐστιν ἡ ἀλήθεια. 


ροῦντες, ὃ 


ἡ τρεῖς : οἱ τρεῖς N. 


cause it is essentially fitted to do so: 
or (2) because by its essential nature 
it is constrained to do so. Perhaps 
the one idea passes into the other, so 
that it is not necessary to distinguish 
them sharply. In that which is Di- 
vine, nature and office coincide. 

τὸ πν. ἐστιν ἡ GA.) the Spirit is the 
Truth. Just as Christ is the Truth 
(John xiv. 6), so the Spirit sent in 
Christ’s name is the Truth. The Spirit 
cannot but make known, as men can 
bear the revelation, that which is 
eternal and absolute in changing phe- 
nomena. That which ‘is’ is in virtue 
of the Spirit, in virtue of Christ (Col 
i. τ ff). 

Bede has a vigorous note on the 
Latin reading (Christus est veritas): 
Quia ergo Spiritus Jesum Christum 
esse veritatem testatur, ipse se veri- 
tatem cognominat, Baptista illum ve- 
ritatem preedicat, Filius tonitrui veri- 
tatem evangelizat : taceant blasphemi 
qui hune phantasma esse dogmati- 
zant ; pereant de terra memoriz eo- 
rum qui eum vel Deum vel hominem 
esse verum denegant. 

7, 8. ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσίν...] Because 


three are they... This clause appears - 


to give the reason for the main pro- 
position in o. 5, that ‘Jesus is the 
Son of God, a truth briefly expressed 
and affirmed by His full Name, ‘Jesus 
Christ” What has been said in τ. 6 
—this is He that came—prepares 
the way for the assertion of this 
complete personal testimony, ade- 
quate according to the human stand- 
ard: Deut. xix. 15; comp. John viii. 
17 ff. The stress laid by the order 
upon ‘three’ emphasises this thought 
of the fulness of the number of the 
witnesses, and the consequent cer- 
tainty of that which they aftirm. The 
faith in Jesus as ‘the Christ, the Son 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V. 7,8 


«.« - , A € 
7δὃτι Tpets εἰσιν Ol μαρτυ- 


- Loa ‘ \ πὶ \ e 
TO σνευμα καὶ TO ὕδωρ Kal TO αιμα, Kat Οἱ 


7, 8 See Additional Note. 


of God’ is reasonable according to the 
ordinary laws of belief. 

It seems to be less natural to regard 
the clause as a confirmation of the 
words which immediately precede. 
The ground of the Spirit’s witness 
is given perfectly in the declaration 
of His Nature and Office as ‘the 
Truth.” Yet it is possible that the 
ὅτι may simply explain the addition 
of the Spirit: “besides ‘the Water’ 
and ‘the Blood,’ there is yet another 
witness; because three are they that 
bear witness.” 

Tpeis...08 μαρτυροῦντες] The passage 
from the neuter τὸ μαρτυροῦν to the 
masculine of μαρτυροῦντες marks the 
different aspect under which the 
witness is now regarded, as a per- 
sonal witness. The transition is made 
through the Spirit, who is regard- 
ed both as a power and as a per- 
son: comp. John xiv. 26; xv. 26, 
TO πνεῦμα... ὅ.. ἐκεῖνος. Just as the 
Spirit is found to be personal in His 
work with men, so also ‘the water’ 
and ‘the blood’ speak personally 
through those in whom their efficacy 
is realised. 

οἱ papr.] The participle, as distin- 
guished from the noun of μάρτυρες 
(Acts i. 8; ii, 32, &e.), expresses the 
actual delivery of the witness, and 
this is a present, continuous, action. 
The witness here is considered mainly 
as the living witness of the Church 
and not as the historical witness of 
the Gospels. Through believers these 
three, ‘the Spirit and the Water 
and the Blood,’ perform a work not 
for believers only but for the world 
(John xvii. 20 ff.). 

8. τὸ πνεῦμα] The Spirit has a two- 
fold office, one corresponding with 
that of Christ (οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ἔλθων... 
τὸ πνεῦμά ἐστιν τὸ μαρτυροῦν...); and 






V. 9] 


- ᾽ Ἅ 2. 
τρεις εἰς TO ἐν εἰσιν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


185 


9 2 A ‘ Ses ᾽ 4 
Ei THY μαρτυριαν των ἀνθρώπων 


ia € ΄ ~ / 4 “ «“ 
λαμβάνομεν, ἡ μαρτυρία τοῦ θεοῦ μείζων ἐστίν, ὅτι 
/ γι ΡΞ ͵ 
αὕτη ἐστὲν ἡ μαρτυρία τοῦ θεοῦ ὅτι μεμαρτύρηκεν περὶ 


9 τῶν ἀνθρ.: τοῦ θεοῦ N*. 


the other coordinate with that of the 
power of spiritual life and the power 
of redemption brought by Christ (τὸ 
mv., τὸ ὕδωρ, τὸ αἷμα). In this latter 
connexion it must be remembered that 
the Spirit is the sign of the glory of 
the Risen Christ; John vii. 39; xvi. 
7; Acts ii. 32 f. Thus the Spirit, 
with the Water and Blood, completes 
the witness to the Incarnation as a 
Fact no less than as an open source 
of blessing. For the witness of the 
Spirit see Acts v. 32. 

οἱ τρεῖς εἰς τὸ ἕν εἰσιν] the three are 
νον the one. The subject is emphati- 
cally repeated to mark the unity of 
the object. ‘The three personal wit- 
nesses are turned to the one abso- 
lute end,’ to establish the one Truth 
(τὸ ἕν, the one, not simply one), that 
definite Truth which is everywhere 
present through the Epistle. The 
idea is not that of simple unanimity 
in the witnesses (eis ἕν εἶναι), but that 
of their convergence (so to speak) 
on the one Gospel of ‘Christ come in 
the flesh,’ to know which is eternal 
life. 

With the phrase εἰς ro ἐν εἶναι may 
be contrasted ἕν εἶναι John x. 30; 
xvii. 21 f.; 1 Cor. 111. 8; τελειοῦσθαι εἰς 
ἕν John xvii. 23; συνάγειν εἰς ἕν 
John xi. 52. 

9—12. St John goes on from con- 
sidering the character of the witness 
to Christ to consider its effectiveness. 
It is a divine witness (9): it is a 
human, internal witness (10): it is a 
ss realised in a present life (11), 
in fellywship with the Son (12). 

9 If]/we receive the witness of men, 
the witness of God ts greater, because 
this is the witness of God, that He 
hath borne witness concerning His 


ὅτι (2°) NAB vg me the: ἥν ς΄. 


Son. * He that believeth on the Son 
of God hath the witness in himself: 
he that believeth not God hath made 
Him a liar, because he hath not be- 
lieved on the witness which God hath 
borne concerning His Son. ™ And 
this is the witness, that God gave us 
eternal life, and this life is in His 
Son. He that hath the Son hath 
the life: he that hath not the Son of 
God hath not the life. 

9. El τὴν μ. τ. dvOp. λαμβ.] Si... 
accipimus V., If we receive... This is 
assumed as unquestioned: ὁ. iii. 13. 
The threefold witness of which St 
John has spoken, simply as being 
threefold, satisfies the conditions of 
human testimony. Much more then, 
he argues, does a threefold divine 
witness meet all claims; and such a 
wituess, it is implied, we have in the 
witness of the Spirit, the water and 
the blood. This witness therefore is 
‘greater’ than the witness of men in 
regard to its authority: John v. 36. 
Comp. ¢. iii. 20; iv. 4. 

For papr. λαμβ. see John iii. 11, 
32 ἧι; ν. 34. 

The form of the argument is irregu- 
lar. Instead of completing the sen- 
tence on the same type as he began, 
‘much more shall we receive the wit- 
ness of God,’ St John states that which 
is the ground of this conclusion, ‘the 
witness of God is greater.’ 

ὅτι αὕτη é....0rt...] guoniam hoc est 
.. quia... V., because this is...that... 
The words look backward and for- 
ward. This triple witness which has 
been described, and which is now 
defined further to be a witness of God 
concerning His Son: this is the final 
form of the witness of God. 

The witness was open and visible 


186 


τοῦ νἱοῦ αὐτοῦ. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V. 10 


A A ΄ o 
το ἡ πιστεύων εἰς τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ 


A ‘ 7 = € ‘ t ἔνι. aad 
ἔχει τὴν μαρτυρίαν ἐν αὑτῷ" ὁ μὴ πιστεύων TH θεῷ 


10 τὴν μαρτ. NB the syrr: - τοῦ θεοῦ A vg me. 


aurw AB: ἑαυτῷ δὰ. 


τῷ θεῷ NB me syrr: τῷ vig A vg syrhlmg (others read τῷ υἱῷ τοῦ θεοῦ, τῷ viv 
αὐτοῦ, and Cod. Am. omits by the first hand). 


to the world in the general effect of 
Christ’s death and the pouring out of 
the Spirit: so much was unquestion- 
able. 

The first conjunction (because) 
does not give the ground of the 
superior authority of the divine wit- 
ness, that is taken for granted, but 
the ground for appealing to it. Such 
a witness has been given, and there- 
fore we appeal to it. 

The second ὅτι is ambiguous. It 
may be (1) parallel with the former 
one: ‘because this is the witness of 
God, because, 1 say, He hath borne 
witness...’; or, it may be (2) explana- 
tory of the paprupiav: ‘because this 
is the witness of God, even that He 
hath borne witness...’; or again (3) 
the word may be the relative (6 τὴ) : 
‘because this is the witness of God, 
even that which He hath witness- 
ed...’ 

No one of the explanations is with- 
out difficulty. Against (2) it may be 
urged that it is strange to insist on 
the idea that the witness of God lies 
in the fact that He hath witnessed 
concerning His Son. 

The usage of St Jobn and of the 
Apostolic writers generally is against 
(3); though perhaps reference may be 
made to iii. 20; John viii. 25. [In 
Matt. xviii. 28 ef τι. 

The usage of St John (c. i. 5; v. 
11, 14) is equally against (1). 

On the whole it is best to take the 
clauseas explanatory of αὕτη: ‘because 
this is the witness of God, even the 
fact that He hath borne witness con- 
cerning His Son.’ God has spoken; 
and His message is the witness to the 
Incarnation. Comp. δ. 11. 

μεμαρτύρηκεν] testificatus est V., 


hath witnessed. The form is to be 
distinguished from ‘witnesseth’ and 
‘ witnessed.’ 

μεμαρτύρηκα Jobn i. 34; iii. 26; v. 
33, 37; Six. 35. (Hebr. xi. 5; 3 John 
12.) 

ἐμαρτύρησα John i. 32; iv. 443 
xiii, 21; Acts xv. 8; 1 Cor. xv. 
15; 1 Tim. vi. 13; 3 John 6; Apoc. 
i. 2; Hebr. xi. 2, 4, 39. 

It may be added that ov. 6—9 
contain a testimony to the Holy 
Trinity in the several works of the 
Divine Persons: Christ ‘comes,’ 
the Spirit ‘witnesses,’ God (the 
Father) ‘hath witnessed concerning 
His Son.’ 

10. The witness is not of external 
testimony only, but internal also. 
Absolute self-surrender to the Son of 
God brings to the believer a direct 
consciousness of His Divine Nature 
and work. He that believeth on the 
Son of God hath the witness in him- 
self. That which for others is external 
is for the believer experimental. The 
witness of Spirit and water and blood 
becomes an inner conviction of life 
and cleansing and redemption. The 
title of divine dignity (the Son of 
God) points to the assurance of this 
effect. Moreover it is to be noticed 
that here the condition laid down is 
belief in the Person of Christ (mor. 
εἰς), and not belief in a fact (mor. ὅτι 
Ὁ. 1). 

ὁ μὴ mor. τῷ 6.) he that believeth 
not God. The direct antithesis to 
‘believing on the Son’ is ‘not believ- 
ing God’ This follows from the fact 
that ‘believing on the Son’ comes from 
‘believing God,’ that is, welcoming 
His testimony. 

For the phrase μὴ πιστεύειν τῷ θεῷ 


V. 11] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


187 


# , , of , \ 
ψεύστην πεποίηκεν αὐτὸν, OTL οὐ πεπίστευκεν εἰς τὴν 
/ a ΄ εἶ \ a ΄ - 
μαρτυρίαν ἣν μεμαρτύρηκεν ὁ θεὸς περὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ. 
1 \ Sf ? \ , ef \ a δ 
"Kal αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ μαρτυρία, ὅτι ζωὴν αἰώνιον ἔδωκεν 


οὐ πεπίστευκεν SB: οὐκ ἐπίστευσεν A (οὐκ ἐπίστευκεν N). 


(as distinguished from μὴ π. εἰς τὸν 6.) 
see John v. 24; vi. 29 f.; viii. 30 ἢ 
Comp. c. iii. 23 n. 

ψεύστην mer. αὐ.) mendacem facit 
V., hath made Him a liar, false in 
all His dealings with men. See i. 
1o n. The word marks the general 
character and not only falsity in the 
particular case. Comp. John viii. 44 ; 
¢. ii. 4,22; iv. 20. The form of expres- 
sion suggests the idea of an inward 
conflict. A voice has been heard and 
it has been deliberately rejected. 

πεποίηκεν... -«πεπίστευκεν)] These two 
perfects definitely connect the present 
position of the unbeliever with a past 
act. When the crisis of choice came 
he refused the message: he made 
God a liar: he did not believe on 
His testimony: and the result of that 
decision entered into him and clings 
to him. Compare, for a similar use of 
πεπίστευκα, John iii, 18; vi. 69 (c. iv. 
16); 31. 27; xvi. 27; xx. 29; 2 Tim. 
1. 12; Tit. iii. 8. 

ὅτι ov πεπίστ.] The negative ex- 
presses the direct fact. Contrast John 
iii, 18 ὅτι μὴ πεπίστ. which presents 
the conception. See John vi. 64. 

οὐ πεπίστ. εἰς τὴν μαρτ.] non cre- 
didit in testimonium V., hath not 
believed on the witness, not simply 
‘believed the witness.’ The phrase 
is unique. Belief in the truth of the 
witness (mor. τῇ μαρτυρίᾳ, compare 
John v. 47) is carried on to personal 
belief in the object of the witness, 
that is, the Incarnate Son Him- 
self. 

The phrase is illustrated by πισ- 
revew εἰς τὸ ὄνομα (Ὁ. 13 0D.) in which 
the ‘name’ represents the Person 
under the particular aspect which it 
expresses. In one other case πιστεύ- 


μεμαρτ.. ἐμαρτύρηκεν δ. 


ew εἰς is used with an object not 
directly personal, John xii. 36 πιστεύειν 
els τὸ φῶς, but here φώς is used with 
immediate reference to John viii. 12; 
ix. 5. 

So it stands out that the ultimate 
object of faith is not a fact or a dogma 
but a Person. 

ἣν pepapt....| It might have seemed 
simpler to say ‘the witness of God’ 
(ze. 9); but St John repeats at length 
what he has shewn that witness to be, 
a witness concerning His Son. 

11, 12, The witness, which has 
been shewn to be divine and internal, 
points also to the presence of a divine 
life, which, given once for all, is en- 
joyed by fellowship with the Son. 

11. καὶ αὕτη... ‘The witness of God’ 
(c. 9) is in part unfolded: the witness 
that He hath given concerning His 
Son is this, that He gave us eternal 
life. The Mission of His Son, which 
He attested, was the gift of life (John 
X. 10, 28; xvii. 2), of life in His Son 
(John xx. 31, ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι). 

¢. αἱ. ἔδωκεν] gave eternal life, not 
hath given. Compare ὁ. iii 23 ἢ 
(ἔδωκεν) with c. iii. 1; iv. 13; v. 20 
(δέδωκεν. The reference is to the 
historic facts by which this life was 
communicated to humanity. That 
which before Christ’s coming was a 
great hope, by His coming was real- 
ised and given. The gift, as far as 
St John here regards it, was made to 
Christians (ἡμῖν), who appropriate it. 

ζωὴν αἰώνιον] vo. 13, 20; 6. iii, 15. 
This form is to be distinguished from 
ἡ ζ. ἡ αἰών. (c. i. 2, note) and ἡ αἰώνιος 
¢. which occurs only John xvii. 3. 
It simply defines the character of the 
life, and does not identify it with the 
only true life. 


188 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V. 12, 13 


© \ con \ of © A , cad cn ry - > t 
ὁ θεὸς ἡμῖν, καὶ αὕτη ἡ ζωὴ ἐν τῷ υἱῷ αὐτοῦ ἐστίν. 


Ins ‘ eA " \ , ς νον \ eX 
oO EX wv TOV ULOV EXEL τὴν ζωήν: oO Mn EX WV TOV ULOV 


cod ΄ ‘ \ ’ wt 
Tou θεοῦ τὴν ζωὴν οὐκ ἔχει. 


ir ὁ θ. ἡμ. Β (the) syrhl: ju. ὁ θ. NA vg me βγῦνβ. 


ἐν τῷ vig] The life is not separate 
from God but in God. Believers united 
with Christ are in Him united with 
God. Comp. Rom. vi. 23; 2 Tim. 
ir. 

12. ὁ €xev...] The variations from 
exact parallelism in the two members 
of the verse are significant. In the 
second member τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ 
stands for τὸν υἱόν, and the position 
of τὴν ζωήν is changed. 

ὁ ἔχων τὸν υἱόν] He that hath the 
Son, in Whom the Father is known. 
Comp. c. ii. 23; 2 John 9; and for 
the use of ἔχειν, John iii. 29 ; iv. 17. 

ἔχει τὴν (1 hath life, or rather 
the life which God has given. Con- 
trast v. 13; iii. 15; John τ. 26; 
X. 10; xx. 31. Comp. Col. iii, + 

In the spirit of these words Igna- 
tius speaks of Jesus Christ as ro 
ἀδιάκριτον ἡμῶν ζῆν, ‘our inseparable 
life’ (Eph. 3); and τὸ ἀληθινὸν ἡμῶν 
ζῆν, ‘our true life’ (Smyrn. 4). Comp. 
Magn. 5; Trail. 9. 

ὃ μὴ ἔχων τ. vi. τοῦ 6.] he that hath 
not the Son of God. The fuller title 
seems to mark emphatically the ne- 
cessity of failure in such a case. God 
is the only source of life. 

For the combination of the positive 
and negative see c. i. 5; ii. 4, 27; 
John i. 3; iii. 16. 

III. Tue Acriviry anp ConFIDENCE 
OF THE ΟἨἩΒΙΒΤΙΑΝ Lire: Ept- 
LOGUE. 


This last section of the Epistle is 
symmetrical in structure: 
1. The aim re-stated (13). 
2. he confidence of spiritual 
action (14—17). 
3. The certainty of spiritual 
knowledge (18—20). 


- »} 
1 Ταῦτα ἔγραψα 
αὕτη ἐστὶν 7 ἵ. A. 


4. A final warning (21). 

The progress of thought is clear. 
Having reached the close of his 
writing St John recals the main 
purpose of writing it (i. 4), which he 
has fulfilled (Ὁ. 13); and then illus- 
trates the confidence of the Christian 
life under two aspects, (1) as it finds 
expression in spiritual action (14—17), 
and (2) as it is realised in inward con- 
viction (18—-20).. He concludes by a 
warning against everything which 
usurps the place of God (21).4 


1. The aim of the Epistle re- 
stated (13). 


13 These things have I written, that 
ye may know that ye hace eternal life, 
to you who believe on the name of the 
Son of God. 

13. Tatra ἔγραψα] These things 
have I written (I wrote)... In re- 
viewing his Epistle St John indicates 
the fulfilment of his purpose (i. 3, 4). 
The consciousness of eternal life brings 
divine fellowship and completed joy. 
Comp. John xx. 30 ἢ 

For the use of ἔγραψα (contrast 
γέγραφα John xix. 22) see c. ii. 12 
—14 note. The Apostle looks back 
upon his work, and records the aim 
which he set before himself. 

ἵνα εἰδῆτε] ut sciatis V., that ye 
may know with a knowledge final and 
certain. Compare ii. 29 note; iii. 14 
note. The eternal life may be pre- 
sent and yet not realised in its inhe- 
rent power. The fruits may not be 
referred to their source; and again 
they may be delayed. But there isa 
knowledge of life which is independ- 
ent of external signs; and this St 
John seeks to quicken. 

The order ζωὴν ἔχ. αἰών. is not found 


V. 14] THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 189 


Con df 32 σ .« \ »" » ἢ - Ῥ 
ὑμῖν ἵνα εἰδῆτε ὅτι ζωὴν ἔχετε αἰώνιον, τοῖς πιστεύουσιν 
> 4 ww ΄ ες ΄ ΄ ~ « ᾽ 

εἰς τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ. “kai αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ 


F a " A 2 Ἰὰ av a 
παρρησία ἣν ἔχομεν πρὸς αὐτόν, OTL ἐάν τι αἰτώμεθα 


13 ὑμῖν NAB ve me the syrr: - τοῖς πιστεύουσιν εἰς τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ ς΄. 


ἔχ. αἰών. ΑΒ vg syrhl: αἰών. ἔχ. ὃὲ, 


ovres NCA vg me the: καὶ ἵνα πιστεύητε ς΄", 


τοῖς πιστεύουσιν N*B syrr: οἱ πιστεύ- 
14 ἔχομεν: ἔχωμεν A. ὅτι 


ἐάν τι SSB syrhl the: ὅτι ἄν A: ὅτι ὃ ἐάν vg syrvg. 


elsewhere: the epithet comes as an 
afterthought: ‘that ye have life—yes, 
eternal life.’ 

τοῖς πιστεύουσιν) to you who beliece. 
The dative, which is added as a kind 
of afterthought, defines the character 
of the persons who are addressed : ‘to 
you, yes, to you who believe ..2. Com- 
pare John i. 12; v.16. The present 
activity of faith (πιστεύουσιν) is the 
sign of life (iii. 23 note). 

τοῖς πιστ. εἰς TO dv....] Gui creditis 
in nomine...V., who believe in the 
name of..., who believe in Him who 
is revealed to us under this title as 
being the Son of God. Contrast iii. 
23 note (mor. τῷ ov.); and compare 
John i, 12 note; ii. 23 note; iii. 18. 
For similar uses of ὄνομα see Ο. ii. 12 
(διὰ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ) note; 3 John 7 
(τὸ ὄνομα) note. 

τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ) the Son of God, 
φῦ. 5, 10, 12, 20; iii, 8 note; iv. 15. 
The title is the pledge of the cer- 
tainty of the possession of life. 


2. The confidence of spiritual action 
(14—17). 

The consciousness of a divine life 
brings to the believer perfect bold- 
ness in prayer, that is, in converse 
with God (14, 15); and this boldness 
finds characteristic expression in in- 
tercession for the brethren (16, 17). 

4 And this is the boldness which 
we have towards Him, that, if we ask 
anything according to His will, He 
heareth us. "And tf we know that 
He heareth us whatsoever we ask, we 
know that we have the petitions which 
we have asked from Him. 


6 Tf any one see his brother sinning 
ὦ sin not unto death, he shall ask, and 
He (he) will give him life, even to them 
that sin not unto death. There is 
sin unto death: I do not say that he 
should pray for that: all un- 
righteousness 13 sin, and there is sin 
not unto death. 

14. καὶ αὕτη... It is implied that 
the knowledge which the Christian 
can gain is not for mere passive pos- 
session, nor yet for himself alone. It 
finds scope in corresponding expres- 
sion. The life is fruitful. Comp. 
Matt. xviii. 15, 20. 

ἡ παρρησία ἣν ἔχομεν... siducia 
quam habemus... V., the boldness of 
speech, utterance, which we hare as 
the consequence of our possession of 
life. See c. ii. 28 note. The gift of 
eternal life enables the believer to 
come directly before God (Hebr. iv. 
16) and speak every thought without 
reserve. This he has strength to do 
in the present trials of life (ὁ. iii. 21); 
and he looks forward to a like open- 
ness of trust ‘at the presence of 
Christ’ (ii. 28), and ‘in the day of 
judgment’ (iv. 17). 

πρὸς αὐτόν] ad eum V., towards 
Him, that is, God, the main subject 
of the passage. 

αὕτη ... ὅτι ..-. ἀκούει ...1 this...that 
..._He heareth. The fact (that He 
heareth) and not the conviction of 
the fact (‘we know that He heareth’), 
is identified with the feeling. Our 
boldness is not simply a belief, but 
indeed a certainty, an experience. 

ἐάν τι αἰτώμεθα] quodcungue petie- 
rimus V., if we ask anything. The 


[90 


‘ \ , ᾽ ~ ᾽ “ © ἊΝ 
κατὰ τὸ θέλημα αὐτοῦ ἀκούει ἡμῶν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V. 15, 16 


2/\ ᾽} 
τό καὶ ἐὰν οἴδαμεν 


J > ¢ con AN > 7 θ ἴδ 4 " 
OTL AKOVEL HUWY O ἐᾶν aALTWMEUA, OLOAMEV OTL EX OMEV 


\ / a fe >> ? ta 
Ta αἰτήματα a ἠτήκαμεν απ αὐτου. 


θέλημα: ὄνομα A. 


(N°) B syrr (me) the: et scimus vg: om. N*A. 


ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ NB: wap’ αὐτοῦ SA. 


distinction between the middle (ai- 
τεῖσθαι) and the active (αἰτεῖν) is not 
sharply drawn; but generally the 
personal reference is suggested by 
the middle while the request is left 
wholly undefined as to its destination 
by the active. Compare John xvi. 
24, 26; xiv. 13, 14; xv. 16 with xv, 
7; James iv. 2, 3. For αἰτεῖσθαι see 
Matt. xxvii. 20 (and parallels), 58 (and 
parallels); Acts iii. 14. 

κατὰ τὸ θέλημα αὐ. according to 
His will. Comp. τ Pet. iv. 19; Gal. 
i. 4; Eph. i. 5, 11. This will finds 
expression in the soul: John xv. 7; 
and is the continuous manifestation 
of the divine nature through Christ. 
Thus asking ‘according to the will of 
God’ is equivalent to asking ‘in 
Christ’s name’: John xiv. 13 note. 

‘The will of God’ regards the 
spiritual consummation of man (6. ii. 
17; Rom. ii, 18), and all external 
things only so far as they are con- 
tributory to this. 

ἀκούει ἡμῶν] Compare John ix. 31; 
xi. 41 f. This sense of ‘hearing’ is 
peculiar to St John. The ‘hearing’ 
of God, like the ‘knowledge’ of God, 
carries with it every perfect conse- 
quence. For the thought seec. iii. 22. 

15. καὶ ἐὰν οἴδαμεν... Et scimus V., 
si scimus F., And if we know... The 
force of this unusual construction ap- 
pears to be to throw the uncertainty 
upon the fact of the presence of the 
knowledge and not upon the know- 
ledge itself. The sense required is 
not ‘and should we know,’ but ‘and 
should it be that we know.’ 

ὃ ἐὰν αἰτώμεθα] whatsoever we ask. 
This universal phrase can be substi- 


ἐν f ἂν 
τό Ἐὰν τις ἴδη τὸν 


15 καὶ ἐὰν (ἂν B) οἴδαμεν (ἴδωμεν N° me) ὅτι ἀκ. ἡ. «΄ 


ἔχομεν : ἔχωμεν ® (ἐὰν ἔχ. N*). 


tuted for the limited phrase which 
was used before (ἐάν τι air. κιτ.θ.). The 
believer would not make his own 
any prayer which is not according 
to God’s will. And since he has made 
God’s will his own will, he has all he 
truly seeks in immediate and present 
possession (Mark xi 24) though the 
visible fulfilment may be delayed. 

τὰ αἰτήματα] petitiones V., the pe- 
titions (Phil. iv. 6; Luke xxiii. 24): 
the substance of the requests, if not 
necessarily the actual things asked 
for (τὰ αἰτηθέντα). 

an’ αὐτοῦ] from Him. These words 
go perhaps more naturally with ‘have’ 
(c. ii. 20) than with ‘asked’ Yet see 
Matt. xx. 20 (ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ). 

16,17. That boldness of access to 
God, which finds expression in prayer, 
finds its most characteristic expres- 
sion in intercessory prayer. Fel- 
lowship with God involves fellowship 
with man (i. 3). The energy of 
Christian life is from the first social. 
Hence St John passes naturally from 
the general thought of prayer to that 
of prayer for the brethren. And in 
doing this he fixes attention on the 
failures of Christians. These are the 
sorest trial of faith. 

The prevailing power of intercession 
corresponds with the Christian revela- 
tion of the unity of the Body of Christ. 
When this power is exercised for 
others it is exercised in a true sense 
for ourselves, and not, arbitrarily as 
it were, for those apart fromus. Apo- 
stolic teaching recognises a mysterious 
dependence of man upon man in the 
spiritual order like that which is now 
being shewn to exist in the physical 


Υ. 16] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


19! 


ἐδ \ ’ - € , € / \ ‘ U 

ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ ἁμαρτάνοντα ἁμαρτίαν μὴ πρὸς θάνατον, 
> , \ , Ped ὡς ΄ 

αἰτήσει, καὶ δώσει αὐτῷ ζωήν, τοῖς ἁμαρτάνουσιν μὴ 


16 αἰτήσει... δώσει : αἰτήσις (-ἤσει5).. «δώσεις N*. 


ἁμαρτάν. ἁμαρτίαν μή A, 


order; and throughout the Epistle 
St John assumes the reality of this 
inner fellowship among those whom 
he addresses, and he bases his argu- 
ments upon it. 

Compare 1 Pet. iv. 8 τὴν εἰς ἑαυτοὺς 
ἀγάπην; td. 10 εἰς ἑαυτοὺς αὐτὸ δια- 
κονοῦντες; Eph. iv. 32; Col. iii. 13 
χαριζόμενοι ἑαυτοῖς ; Col. 111. 16 νουθε- 
τοῦντες ἑαυτούς. 

16. "Eady τις ἴδῃ...} Lf any one see 

The duty, the instinct, is uni- 
versal in the Christian Society. At 
the same time the character of the 
sin towards which the duty is exer- 
cised is clear even outwardly. It is 
not a matter simply of suspicion or 
doubt. 

τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ] his brother. 
The end of prayer is the perfection of 
the whole Christian body. The Chris- 
tian prays for himself only as a mem- 
ber in the society. The sight of sin 
in ‘a brother’—a fellow Christian 
(ce. ii. 9 note)—and it is ouly with 
Christians that St John is dealing— 
necessarily stirs to intercession. Comp. 
Clem. ad Cor. i. 2 ἐπὶ τοῖς mapa- 
πτώμασι τῶν πλήσιον emevOeire: τὰ 
ὑστερήματα αὐτῶν ἴδια ἐκρίνετε. 

ἅμαρτ. ἅμαρτ.] peccare peccatum 
V., sinning a sin. The form of ex- 
pression (ἁμαρτάνοντα, inadequately 
rendered in the Latin) emphasises 
the outward present character of the 
act. There is no exact parallel in 
N. T. to the phrase. Comp. ὁ. ii 25. 
Winer 111. § 32, 2. 

μὴ πρὸς θάνατον] not unto death. 
Life is fellowship with Christ (δ. 12). 
Death is separation from Him. All 
sin tends to make the fellowship less 
complete. Yet not all equally; nor 
all in a fixed and unalterable degree. 

The thought is not of the definite 


Tots ἁμαρτ. μή: τοῖς μὴ 


external characteristics of particular 
acts, as having an absolute value, but 
of acts in relation to the man’s whole 
nature and life. 

The clause ‘not unto death’ goes 
both with the participle and with the 
noun, as is shewn separately after- 
wards. 

For the conception of ‘death’ sce 
c. ii, 14 (the only other place in the 
Epistles where the word occurs), 
John v. 24 (viii. 51 f.; vi. 50; xi. 26; 
viii. 24). The thought is evidently 
not of physical death as James v. 14 
ff. Compare, in another connexion, 
John xi. 4 αὕτη ἡ ἀσθένεια οὐκ ἔστι 
πρὸς θάνατον. The subjective nega- 
tive (μὴ πρὸς 6.) naturally follows 
from the supposition (ἐάν τις). It is 
otherwise in Ὁ. 17. 

αἰτήσει] petit (-at) V., postulabit ¥., 
he shall ask. This will be his natural 
and spontaneous action. There is no 
need of a command. 

καὶ δώσει] and he will give. The 
subject has been taken to be (1) the 
intercessor, or (2) God (dabit et ritam 
Dominus Tert. de Pudic. 19; but 
dabitur et, id. 2). In favour of the 
first view the continuity of the con- 
struction (αἰτήσει, δώσει) and the pa- 
rallel James v. 20 have been urged. 

The second view is that which is at 
first suggested by the language of 
Scripture generally. To ‘give life’ 
is elsewhere treated as a divine pre- 
rogative; John vi. 33; x. 28; xvii. 2; 
v. 11. But there is nothing unscrip- 
tural in the thought that the believer 
does that which God does through 
him; James v.20. Still on the whole 
it seems more natural to see here 
a reference to the direct action of 
God. 

If ‘God’ be the subject of ‘give’ 


192 


\ 
σρος θάνατον. 


᾽ ΄ὔ “ .«“ ᾽ , 
ἐκείνης λέγω ἵνα EpwTnon. 


ἐρωτήσῃ : τις Vg syrvg. 


then αὐτῷ may be the ‘ethical’ 
dative, and τοῖς mor. the direct 
object of δώσει: ‘God shall give life 
to those that sin not unto death for 
him, in answer to his prayers.’ This 
however seems to be artificial, The 
αὐτῷ is most naturally the sinning 
brother in any case. 

8. Conv] give life. The sinner is 
not ‘dead,’ nor yet ‘sinning unto 
death,’ but his life is, as it were, sus- 
pended in part. Comp. John x. 10. 

τοῖς ayapt.] even to them that... 
The single case (ἁμαρτάνοντα) is now 
generalised. Comp. Ὁ. 13. 

The apposition of a personal plural 
to an abstract noun is not strictly 
parallel; 1 Cor. i. 2. 

ἔστιν ἅμ. πρὸς 6.| Est peccatum ad 
mortem V., There is sin unto death. 
The translation ‘a sin’ (ἁμαρτία τις) 
is too definite. The thought is not 
of specific acts as such, but of acts 
which have a certain character: 
‘There is that which must be de- 
scribed as sin unto death, there is 
that which wholly separates from 
Christ.’ The phrase, it must be re- 
membered, comes in a passage which 
deals with the prayer of Christians 
for Christians and not for heathen. 
See Additional Note. 

οὐ περὶ ἐκείνης λέγω iva...] non pro 
illo dico ut roget quis V., not con- 
cerning that do I say that... The 
sin unto death is isolated and re- 
garded in its terrible distinctness 
(ἐκείνη. The words περὶ ἐκείνης 
may be connected either with λέγω or 
with ἐρωτήσῃ. Perhaps it is best to 
connect them with ἐρωτήσῃ. Comp. 
John xvi. 26; xvii. 9, 20. 

The construction λέγω ἵνα is not 
common: Acts xix. 4. Comp. εἰπεῖν 
ἵνα Matt. iv. 3, &c.; ἐρρήθη ἵνα Apoc. 
vi. 11, ὅτο, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V. 17 


af \ tA 
ἔστιν ἁμαρτία πρὸς θάνατον; ov περὲ 


1 μὴ “- ἐδ tf © ΄,ὔ 
σασα AOLKLA αμαρτίια 
ἐρωτήσῃς &. 


ἐρωτήσῃ] make request. The change 
of the verb from αἰτεῖν (V. petere), 
(αἰτεῖσθαι), to ἐρωτᾷν (V. rogare), 
cannot but be significant. ᾿Ἐρωτᾷν 
is the word which is used of Christ’s 
prayer to the Father (John xiv. 16; 
xvi. 26; xvii. 9, 15,20; comp. 1 Thess. 
iv. 1; 2 John 5). It seems to mark 
the request which is based upon 
fellowship, upon a likeness of posi- 
tion. Here then it would naturally 
express the prayer of brother for 
brother as such, to the common 
Father. Such a prayer is not en- 
joined by the apostle. At the same 
time he does not forbid it. It does 
not lie within his scope. 

17. πᾶσα ἀδικία... omnis inigui- 
tas... V., all unrighteousness... The 
words are added to shew the wide 
scope which is given for the exercise 
of Christian sympathy and interces- 
sion. Apart from such sins as are 
open manifestations of a character 
alien from God, there are other sins 
which flow from human imperfection 
and infirmity, and in regard to these 
Christian intercession has its work. 
All unrighteousness (6. i. 9), all failure 
to fulfil our duty one to another, is 
sin; and in this ample field there is 
abundant opportunity for the exercise 
of prayer. There is a sin not unto 
death, of which the consequences may 
be removed by the brother’s peti- 
tion. 

The statement that ‘all unright- 
eousness is sin’ must be compared 


1 It is interesting to notice that ἐρωτᾷν 
is used in this sense of Christian prayer 
for Christians in a very early inscription 
in the Roman Catacombs: zHCHC EN 
κω Kal EPWTA YTTIEP HMWN (North- 
cote and Brownlow, Roma Sotterranea, 
ii. 159). 


Υ. 18] 


2 t A of ᾿ , 
ἐστίν, καὶ ἔστιν ἁμαρτία οὐ πρὸς θανατον. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


193 
8 Qt 


ii - εξ ΄ 2 - cod ε 
δαμεν ὅτι πᾶς ὁ γεγεννημένος ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐχ ἁμαρ- 


17 οὐ πρός: om. οὐ vg syrhl the Tert. 


with the comprehensive definition of 
sin in c. iii. 4 lazolessness is sin, and 
conversely sin is lawlessness. Sin is 
the most general term and is used in 
regard to the will of God for man. 
By whatever act, internal or external, 
man falls short of this will, as it is 
spiritually apprehended, he ‘sins.’ The 
will of God may be conceived of as 
embodied in ‘law,’ in respect of the 
whole constitution of things, or in 
‘right, in respect of the claims made 
by others. So it is that all violation 
of law and all violation of right is sin 
looked at in a special aspect. Un- 
righteousness is one manifestation of 
sin. Comp. Rom. vi. 13 ὅπλα ἀδικίας 
τῇ ἁμαρτίᾳ. 


3. The certainty of spiritual know- 
ledge (18—20). 

The thought of sin, of sin among 
the brethren, of sin unto death, forces 
the Apostle to recal once more the 
assurance of faith. In spite of the 
sad lessons of daily experience he re- 
affirms the truths which the Christian 
knows: the privileges of the divine 
birth (18); the fact of the divine 
kinsmanship (19); the advance in 
divine understanding issuing from 
divine fellowship (20). 

The threefold repetition of οἴδαμεν, 
we know (18, 19, 20), gives a rhythmic 
form to the paragraph. 

3 We know that everyone who is 
begotten of God sinneth not, but He 
that was beyotten of God keepeth him 
and the evil one toucheth him not. 

το We know that we are in God 
and the whole world lieth in the ecil 
one. 
20 We know that the Son of God 
hath come and hath given to us un- 
derstanding that we may know Him 
that is true; and we are in Him that 


W. J. 


is true, even in His Son Jesus Christ. 

This is the true God and life eter- 
nal. 

18. The power of intercession to 
overcome the consequences of sin 
might seem to encourage a certain 
indifference to sin. Therefore St John 
re-afirms the elements of Christian 
knowledge. From this point of sight 
the first truth of which the Christian 
is assured is that, in spite of the ab- 
normal presence of sin even among 
the brethren, the child of God ‘sin- 
neth not.’ He has a watchful Pro- 
tector stronger than his adversary. 

Οἴδαμεν] Scimus V., We know. 
St John uses this appeal to absolute 
knowledge in two forms: ‘we know, 
and ‘ye know.’ The former occurs: 

iii. 2 οἴδαμεν ὅτι ἐὰν φανερωθῇ ὅμοιοι 
αὐτῷ ἐσόμεθα, ὅτι ὀψόμεθα αὐτὸν 
καθώς ἐστιν. 

iii, 14 ἡμεῖς οἴδαμεν ὅτι μεταβεβή- 
καμεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτου εἰς τὴν ζωὴν, ὅτι 
ἀγαπῶμεν τοὺς ἀδελφούς. 

v. 18 οἴδαμεν ὅτι πᾶς ὁ γεγεννημένος 
ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐχ ἁμαρτάνει. 

V. 19 οἴδαμεν ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐσμέν. 

Υ. 20 οἴδαμεν ὅτι ὃ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ 
ἥκει καὶ δέδωκεν ἡμῖν διάνοιαν ἵνα γινώ- 
σκομεν τὸν ἀληθινόν. 

In contrast with these appeals to 
fundamental knowledge, St John else- 
where appeals to the knowledge 
brought by actual experience (ywd- 
σκομεν): Ὁ. 2 note. 

St Paul uses the same form (οἴδα- 
pev) not unfrequently: 1 Cor. viii. 1, 
4; 2 Cor. v. 1; Rom. ii. 2; iii. 19; 
vii. 14; Vili, 22, 28; 1 Tim. i. 8. 

Οἴδατε 18 found: 

ii. 20 οἴδατε πάντες.. τὴν ἀλήθειαν. 

iii. 5 οἴδατε ὅτι ἐκεῖνος ἐφανερώθη ἵνα 
τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἄρῃ. 

iii. 15 οἴδατε ὅτι πᾶς ἀνθρωποκτόνος 
οὐκ ἔχει ζωὴν αἰώνιον ἐν αὐτῷ μένουσαν. 


13 


194 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V. 19 


> r ΄ ~ ᾽ La ‘ 
raver, GAN ὁ γεννηθεὶς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ τηρεῖ αὐτον, Kat 


«“ > - 

ὸ πονηρὸς οὐχ ἅπτεται αὐτοῦ. 
΄ ΄ df 

θεοῦ ἐσμέν, καὶ ὁ κόσμος ὅλος 


18 ὁ γεννηθείς: generatio vg. 


πᾶς ὁ γεγενν. ἐκ τοῦ 6.) omnis 
qui natus est ex Deo V. Comp. 6. 
iii. 9 note. 

οὐχ ἁμαρτάνει] Comp. ili. 9 note 
(ἁμαρτίαν οὐ ποιεῖ). While St John 
states this without reserve he yet 
recognises ‘the brother’—brother as 
son of the one Father—‘sinning a sin 
not unto death’ (v. 16). The paradox 
remains unsolved, 

ἀλλ᾽ ὁ γεννηθεὶς...τ. av.] sed genera- 
tio (nativitas F.) Det conservat eum 
V., but He that was Begotten of God 
keepeth him. He does not depend 
on his own strength or vigilance. He 
has an active Enemy (ὁ πονηρός), but 
he has also a watchful Guardian. 

The phrase ὁ γεννηθεὶς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ 
isunique. Standing as it does in close 
juxtaposition with ὁ γεγεννημένος ἐκ 
τοῦ θεοῦ it is impossible to regard it 
as identical in reference, and the men- 
tion of the great adversary naturally 
suggests the thought of the Son of 
God. The peculiar expression is pro- 
bably used to emphasise the con- 
nexion of the Son with those whom 
He ‘is not ashamed to call brethren’ 
(Hebr. ii, 11 ἐξ ἑνὸς πάντες); while 
the difference of γεννηθείς from γε- 
γεννημένος suggests that difference in 
the sonship of the Son from the son- 
ship of men which is marked in John v. 
26 τῷ υἱῷ ἔδωκεν ζωὴν ἔχειν ἐν ἑαυτῷ. 

The remarkable Latin reading ap- 
pears to represent the Greek ἡ γέν- 
νησις τοῦ θεοῦ (Matt. i. 18). 

τηρεῖ] The verb is used of persons 
Matt. xxvii. 36, 54; (xxviii. 4); John 
xvii. II, 15 (note); Apoc. iii, 10; 
Jude 21 (ἑαυτοὺς τηρήσατε). It ex- 
presses a watchful regard from with- 
out rather than safe custody. 

ὁ πονηρός] malignus V. See c. ii. 
13 note. 


» « ᾷ nea 
᾿ϑοἴδαμεν OTL EK TOU 
ἐν τῷ πονηρῷ κεῖται. 
αὐτόν A*B vg: ἑαυτόν SNA**. 


ἅπτεται] tangit V. The verb occurs 
elsewhere in St John only in John xx. 
17. It describes ‘a laying hold on,’ 
more than a mere superficial touch 
(θιγγάνειν). Even when it is used of 
simple physical contact, a deeper 
connexion is indicated, as when the 
Lord ‘touched’ the sick. See Coi. ii. 
21 μὴ ἅψη μηδὲ γεύσῃ μηδὲ θίγῃς. 
Compare Ps. cv. 15 μὴ ἄψησθε 
τῶν χριστῶν pov. The ground of 
safety is revealed in John xiv. 30 ἐν 
ἐμοὶ οὐκ ἔχει οὐδέν. Ag yet the prin- 
ciple of evil is without. 

19. From the general statement 
of the privilege of Sons of God St 
John goes on to the affirmation of 
the personal relation in which he aud 
those whom he addresses stand to 
Him (ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐσμένλ 

The structure of the verse is express- 
ive. The absence of the personal pro- 
noun (contrast iv. 6) in the first clause 
throws all the emphasis upon the 
divine source of life: ‘We know that 
it is from God we draw our being.’ In 
the second clause the emphasis is 
changed. Over against the Christian 
Society, only faintly indicated in the 
preceding words, stands ‘the whole 
world,’ and on this attention is fixed. 
The relation of the Church to God 
is widely different from that of the 
world to the Evil One. 

This difference is brought out in 
the two corresponding phrases ἐκ τοῦ 
θεοῦ εἶναι and ἐν τῷ πονηρῷ κεῖσθαι. 
The first describes the absolute source 
of being: the second the actual (but 
not essential) position. 

ἐκ τοῦ 6. ἐ] See Additional Note 
on iii. 1, 

καὶ ὁ x. ὅ. This clause like the 
corresponding clauses in vv. 18 (ἀλλὰ 
ὁ yevv.), 20 (καί ἐσμεν), ia an inde 


Υ͂. 20] 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


195 


ο .» \ / ey ΄σ ΄“ cf - 
*°oldauev δὲ ὅτι ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ ἥκει, καὶ δέδωκεν ἡμῖν 

[ἡ [2 x A ᾿ ΄ 
διάνοιαν ἵνα γινώσκομεν τὸν ἀληθινόν: καί ἐσμεν ἐν τῷ 


20 οἴδαμεν δέ NB me: καὶ οἴδαμεν A vg syrr the. 


ἥκει: - οὐ carnem induit 


nostri causa et passus est et resurrexit a mortuis; adsumpsit nos et dedit....(Latt.). 


δέδωκεν : ἔδωκεν A. 
+ θεόν A vg me (Latt.). 


pendent statement and not dependent 
on ὅτι. The Christian is able to look 
upon the saddest facts of life without 
being overwhelmed by them. 

The order ὁ κόσμος ὅλος suggests a 
slightly different conception from ὅλος 
6 κόσμος (c. ii, 2): ‘the world, the 
organization of society as alien from 
and opposed to God, is wholly, in all 
its parts and elements, placed in the 
domain of...’ The two thoughts of the 
world, and of the. entirety of it, are 
given separately. The same form 
occurs Matt. svi. 26 and parallels; 
and the same order in Matt. xxvi. 59; 
Le. xi. 36; John iv. 53; Acts xxi. 
30; 1 Cor. xiv. 23; Apoc. iii. 10; 
vi. 12; xii. 9; xvi. 14. There is a 
similar difference of colour given by 
the corresponding position of πᾶς: 
John v. 22; xvi. 13; Matt. x. 30; xiii. 
56; xxvi. 56; Acts xvi. 33; Rom. xii. 
4; xvi. 16; 1 Cor. vii. 17; x. I; Xv. 7; 
xvi. 20, &. 

ἐν τῷ πον. κι] in maligno positus 
est V., lieth in the evil one, is placed 
in the sphere of his influence. There 
is no question here of the Evil One 
‘laying hold on’ (ἅπτεσθαι) the world, 
as from without (v.°8): it has been 
placed ‘in him.’ The phrase answers 
to the εἶναι ἐν τῷ ἀληθινῷ which fol- 
lows, and to the characteristic Pauline 
ἐν χριστῷς Comp. ¢ 111. 24, iv. 15 
note. The connexion shews beyond 
question that τῷ πονηρῷ is masculine, 
and the converse of κεῖσθαι ἐν τ. π. i8 
given in John xvii. 15 ἵνα τηρήσῃς ἐκ 
τοῦ πονηροῦ. Compare Luke xi. 15 ff. 
ἐν Βεελζεβούλ. 

A close parallel to the expression is 
found in Soph. Gd. Col. 247 ἐν ὑμῖν 
ὡς θεῷ κείμεθα τλάμονες. Comp. Gd. 


γινώσκομεν NAB*: γινώσκωμεν ς΄. 
ἐσμέν : simus vg. 


τὸν ἀλ.: τὸ dd. N* the: 
ἐν τῷ ἀλ.. OM. Me: in vita the. 


R. 314; Ale. 279. 

20. The third affirmation of know- 
ledge is introduced by the adversative 
particle (οἴδ. δέ. There is, this seems 
to be the line of thought, a startling 
antithesis in life of good and evil. 
We have been made to feel it in all 
its intensity. But at the same time 
we can face it in faith. That which 
is as yet dark will be made light. 
There is given to us the power of 
ever-advancing knowledge and of pre- 
sent divine fellowship. We can wait 
even as God waits. The particle δέ 
is comparatively unfrequent in St 
Johu’s writings: ¢. 1. 7; ii. 2, 5, 13, 
17; ili, 12, 17; iv. 18; 3 John 14. 

ἥκει, καὶ δέδωκεν] hath come and 
hath given. Faith rests on the per- 
manence of the fact and not upon 
the historic fact only. Comp. John 
viii. 42 note. 

δέδωκεν] c. 111. 1, iv. 13. Contrast 
iii. 23, 24; v. 11 (ἔδωκεν) note. 

διάνοιαν) sensum V., understand- 
ing. This is the only place in which 
the term occurs in St John’s writings ; 
and generally nouns which express 
intellectual powers are rare in them. 
Thus St John never uses γνῶσις, nor 
is νοῦς found in his Gospel or Epistles. 
Διάνοια, a8 compared with νοῦς, repre- 
sents the process of rational thought. 
Comp. Eph. iv. 18 ἐν ματαιότητι τοῦ 
νοὸς αὐτῶν, ἐσκοτωμένοι τῇ διανοίᾳ 
ὄντες (the first principles of the Gen- 
tiles were unsubstantial, and they had 
lost the power of right reasoning). 
Exclusive of quotations from the Lxx, 
διάνοια is found: 1 Pet. i. 13 ἀναζωσά- 
μένοι τὰς ὀσφύας τῆς διανοίας ; 2 Pet. 
111. 1 διεγείρω τὴν εἰλικρινῆ διάνοιαν ; 
and, in a more concrete sense, Le. i. 


13—2 


196 


ἀληθινῷ, ἐν τῷ view αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστῷ. 


Te Xe: 


51 διανοίᾳ καρδίας ; Col. i. 21 ἐχθροὺς 
τῇ διανοίᾳ; Eph. ii. 3 τὰ θελήματα τῆς 
σαρκὸς καὶ τῶν διανοιῶν. 

That with which ‘the Son of God’ 
Incarnate has endowed believers is 
a power of understanding, of inter- 
preting, of following out to their right 
issues, the complex facts of life; and 
the end of the gift is that they may 
know, not by one decisive act (ἵνα 
γνῶσιν) but by a continuous and pro- 
gressive apprehension (iva γινῶσκωσι), 
‘Him that is true.’ Thus the object 
of knowledge is not abstract but per- 
sonal: not the Truth, but Him of 
Whom all that is true is a partial 
revelation. 

It is evident that the fact of the 
Incarnation (υἱὸς τοῦ 6. ἥκει) vitally 
welcomed carries with it the power 
of believing in and seeing little by 
little the divine purpose of life under 
the perplexing riddles of phenomena. 

The language in which Ignatius de- 
scribes this gift is remarkable: διὰ ri 
οὐ πάντες φρόνιμοι γινόμεθα λαβόντες 
θεοῦ γνῶσιν, ὅ ἐστιν ᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστός ; 
τί μωρῶς ἀπολλύμεθα ἀγνοοῦντες τὸ χά- 
ρισμα ὃ πέπομφεν ἀληθῶς ὁ Κύριος; 
(ad Eph. xvii.). 

ἵνα γινώσκομεν] This clause finds a 
remarkable commentary in John xvii. 
3. Eternal life is the never-ending 
effort after this knowledge of God. 
Compare John x. 38, iva γνῶτε καὶ 
γινώσκητε ὅτι ἐν ἐμοὶ ὁ πατὴρ κἀγὼ ἐν 
αὐτῷ. 

It seems likely that γινώσκομεν is 
to be regarded as a corrupt pronun- 
ciation of γινώσκωμεν. It is remark- 
able that in John xvii. 3 many authori- 
ties read γινώσκουσιν for -wow. Comp. 
Winer, iii. § 41. 1. 

τὸν ἀληθινόν] verum Deum V., 
quod est verum F, (1.6. ro ἀλ.), Him 
that is true, Who in contrast with 
all imaginary and imperfect objects 
of worship completely satisfies the 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[V. 20 


Tr a 
ouTos ἐστιν 


om. A vg. 


idea of Godhead in the mind of man, 
even the Father revealed in and by 
the Son (John i. 18, xiv. 9). Christ 
is also called ὁ ἀληθινός, Apoc. iii. 7; 
compare also Apoc. iii. 14 (vi. 10). For 
ἀληθινός see John i. 9, iv. 23, Xv. 1 
notes. Comp. 1 Thess. i. 9 θεὸς ζῶν 
καὶ ἀληθινός. 

καί ἐσμεν...Ἶ. Xp.] et simus (as de- 
pending on ut) in vero filio eius V. 
St John adds a comment on what he 
has just said. Christians are not only 
enabled to gain a knowledge of God : 
they are already in fellowship with 
Him, ‘in Him’ We are in Him 
that is true, even in His Son, Jesus 
Christ. The latter clause defines and 
confirms the reality of the divine 
fellowship. So far as Christians are 
united with Christ, they are united 
with God. His assumption of humanity 
(Jesus Christ) explains how the union 
is possible. 

οὗτός ἐστιν... As far as the gram- 
matical construction of the sentence 
is concerned the pronoun (οὗτος) may 
refer either to ‘Him that is true’ or 
to ‘Jesus Christ.’ The most natural 
reference however is to the subject 
not locally nearest but dominant in the 
mind of the apostle (comp. ὁ. ii. 22; 
2 John 7; Actsiv. 11; vii. 19). This is 
obviously ‘He that is true’ further 
described by the addition of ‘His 
Son.’ Thus the pronoun gathers up 
the revelation indicated in the words 
which precede (comp. John i. 2 note) : 
This Being—this One who is true, 
who is revealed through and in His 
Son, with whom we are united by 
His Son—is the true God and life 
eternal. In other words the reve- 
lation of God as Father in Christ 
(comp. ii. 22 f.) satisfies, and can alone 
satisfy, the need of man. To know 
God as Father is eternal life (John 
xvii. 3) and so Christ has revealed 
Him (ec. i. 2). 


Υ. 21] 


> εἶ A ‘ 
ὁ ἀληθινὸς θεὸς καὶ ζωὴ αἰώνιος. 


ς \ ’ \ ΄σ > la 
ἑαυτα ἀπὸ τῶν εἰδώλων. 

θεός: om. (Latt.). 
nostra (Latt.). 


ὁ ἀληθ. 6.] Comp. Is. Ixv. 16 (Lxx). 
Compare the famous words of Igna- 
tius: εἷς θεός ἐστι 6 φανερώσας ἑαυτὸν 
διὰ Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ, ὅς 
ἐστιν αὐτοῦ λόγος ἀΐδιος, ἀπὸ σιγῆς 
προελθών, ὃς κατὰ πάντα εὐηρέστησεν 
τῷ πέμψαντι αὐτόν (ad Magn. Viii.). 
Aristides is said to have maintained 
before Hadrian ‘quod Christus Jesus 
solus (ad. verus) esset Deus’ (Mart. 
Rom. ap. Routh Rell. Sacrr. i. 80). 
This statement may be regarded as a 
summary paraphrase of the Greek 
text: γινώσκουσι τὸν θεὸν κτίστην καὶ 
δημιουργὸν τῶν ἁπάντων ἐν υἱῷ μονο- 
γενεῖ καὶ πνεύματι ἁγίῳ καὶ ἄλλον θεὸν 
πλὴν τούτου οὗ σέβονται (c. xv.). The 
Syriac text has no reference to the 
Son and the Holy Spirit. Yet see 
Harnack, Text. τι. Untersuch. i. 114. 

οὗτος... ζωὴ αἰών. The phrase is not 
exactly parallel with those which de- 
scribe (as far as we can apprehend it) 
the essential nature of God (John iv. 
24, 6. i. 5, iv. 8). See Additional Note 
on iv.8. It expresses His relation to 
men, and so far is parallel with Hebr. 
xii. 29 (Deut. iv. 24). 

On ‘Eternal life’ see Additional 
Note. 

4. A final Warning (21). 

From the thought of ‘Him that is 
true’ St John turns almost of necessity 
to the thought of the vain shadows 
which usurp His place. In them the 
world asserted its power. They forced 
themselves into notice on every side 
in innumerable shapes, and tempted 
believers to fall away from the perfect 
simplicity of faith. One sharp warning 
therefore closes the Epistle of which 
the main scope has been to deepen 
the fellowship of man with God and 
through God with man. 

Little children, guard yourselves 
from idols. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


197 
**Texvia, φυλάξατε 


ζωὴ αἱ. NAB: ἡ fal. ©: & ἡ ai. all.: +et resurrectio 
21 ἑαυτά N*B: ἑαυτούς NA. 


εἰδώλων : -- ἀμὴν S. 

21. Τεκνία] Once again the anxiety 
of the Apostle calls up the title of 
affection which has not been used 
since iv. 4. Seeii.r note. . 

φυλάξατε ἑαυτά] custodite vos V., 
guard yourselves. The exact phrase 
is not found again in the N. T. Com- 
pare τηρεῖν ἑαυτόν Jude 21; and with 
an adj. James i. 27; 2 Cor. xi. 9; I 
Tim. v. 22. This ‘guarding’ of the 
Christian answers to the ‘keeping’ of 
Christ (v. 8). The use of the active 
with the reflexive pronoun as dis- 
tinguished from the middle (Le. xii. 15 
φυλάσσεσθε ἀπὸ π. πλεονεξίας) em- 
phasises the duty of personal effort. 
The use of the neuter (€aura) in direct 
agreement with rexvia seems to be 
unique. For the use of ἑαυτά with 
the second person see c.i.8n. The 
aorist imp. (φυλάξατε) is remarkable : 
compare 1 Pet. ii. 17 for its exact force. 
Elsewhere in the Epistle (except iii. 
1) St John always uses the present. 

ἀπὸ τῶν εἰδ.] a simulacris V. The 
word εἴδωλον is comparatively in- 
frequent in the N. T., and elsewhere 
it is always used literally (e.g. 1 Thess. 
i.9). But ‘idolatry’ (Col. iii. 5) and 
‘idolater’ (Eph. v. 5) have a wider 
sense in St Paul; and the context 
here seems to require a corresponding 
extension of the meaning of the term. 
An ‘idol’ is anything which occupies 
the place due to God. The use of the 
definite article call up all the familiar 
objects which fall under the title. 
The command to Christians is not 
generally to keep themselves from 
such things as idols (ἀπὸ εἰδ.} but 
from the well-known objects of a false 
devotion. Compare 2 Cor. vi. 16 pera 
εἰδώλων with Rom. ii. 22 ὁ βδελυσσ. 
τὰ εἴδωλα. 

This comprehensive warning is pro- 
bably the latest voice of Scripture. 


198 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Additional Note on v. τ. The use of the term ‘the Christ.’ 


The use The history of the title ‘Messiah, ‘ Christ’ (WWI, 6 χριστός, ‘the 
of the Anointed One’) is very remarkable. It is not a characteristic title of the 
term ‘ the 3 : : ἢ 5 ῳ = 
Christ’ in Promised Saviour in the O. T. It is not even specifically applied to Him, 
the Apo- unless perhaps in Dan. ix. 25 f., a passage of which the interpretation is 
stolic age very doubtful. And still in the apostolic age it was generally current 
ie a among the Jews in Judea, Galilee, Samaria, and in the Dispersion; and 
Testa- it was applied by them to the object of their religious and national hope 
ment. (Matt. ii. 4, xvi. 16, xxii, 42; John i. 20, 41, iv. 25, xii. 34; Acts ix. 22, 
xvii. 3, xviii, 28, xxvi. 23). The Hebrew word had been clothed in a 
Greek dress, and was current side by side with the Greek equivalent 
(Μεσσίας John i. 42, iv. 25). 
The use The word ΠΟ, ‘anointed, occurs several times in the Book of 
of the Leviticus in the phrase W190 j7130: Lev. iv. 3 (ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς ὁ κεχρισμένος), 
(the v. 16; vi. 15 (ὁ ἀρχ. ὁ xptoros). Comp. 2 Mace. i. 10 (ἀπὸ τοῦ τῶν χριστῶν 
Law, ἱερέων yévous). 
(ii) the In the Historical Books the word is used of the representative kings of 
Historical the theocratic nation: Of Saul: 
Books, 1 Sam. sii. 3, 5 inwn, ὁ χριστὸς αὐτοῦ. 
1 Sam. xxiv. 6, 11; xxvi. 16; 2 Sami. 14, 16 ΠῚ Π" mr, LXX. ὁ 
χριστὸς κυρίου. 
1 Sam. xxvi. 9, 11, 23 ΠῚ Π᾿ MUD | LXX. χριστὸς κυρίου. 
Comp. 2 Sam. i. 21 pws mun a3, LXX. οὐκ ἐχρίσθη ἐν ἐλαίῳ. 
Of David : 
1 Sam. xvi. 6 NWI, LXX. ὁ χριστὸς αὐτοῦ. 
2 Sam, xix. 21 77 men, LXX. 6 χριστὸς κυρίου. 
2 Sam. xxiii. 1 APY" τὸς τ, LXX. χριστὸς θεοῦ Ἰακώβ. 
2 Sam. xxii. 51. 
Ps. xviii. 50. 
Of Solomon : 
2 Chron. vi. 42 Ww, LXX. ὁ χριστός σου. 
Of Jehu : 
2 Chron. xxii. 7 LXX. πρὸς ᾿Ιηοὺ...χριστὸν κυρίου, MYT INLD WA. 
Compare the wider use in: 
1 Sam. ii. το IW FPP OW... LAX. ὑψώσει κέρας χριστοῦ αὐτοῦ. 
» iL 35 WD "BP, LXX. ἐνώπιον χριστῶν (χριστοῦ) μου. 
1 Chron. xvi. 22. 
Ps. cv. 15. 
(iii) the In the Prophets the word is used of Cyrus : 


Prophets, 15. xlv. 1 wind inwind MYA Wy 7D, LXX. οὕτως λέγει κύριος ὁ 


θεὸς τῷ χριστῷ μου Κύρῳ. 


‘THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 199 


In the second passage where it occurs it is doubtful whether it is used 
in a personal or national sense : 


Hab. iii, 13 Wr ony per, LXX. τοῦ σῶσαι τοὺς χριστούς σου. 
It occurs twice in a difficult passage of the Book of Daniel : 


Dan. ix. 25 Ἴ WN, Theod. χριστὸς ἡγούμενος. 
5 26 Mw NID, Theod. ἐξολεθρεύσεται χρίσμα. 


Compare also : 

Amos iv. 13 LX. ἀπαγγέλλων τὸν χριστὸν αὐτοῦ. 
Hebr. inn... 193, 

In the Psalms the Divine King who is the type of ‘the Christ’ is spoken (iv) the 
of as ‘the anointed of the Lord’; and there can be no doubt that it was Hagio- 
from the Psalms, and especially from Ps. ii, that the word passed into prapha. 
common use in the special technical sense. 

Ps. ii. 2 nw oY mn by, LXX. κατὰ τοῦ κυρίου καὶ κατὰ τοῦ 
χριστοῦ αὐτοῦ. 

Ps. xviii. 50 ab invind, LXX. τῷ χριστῷ αὐτοῦ τῷ Δαυείδ. 

Ps. xx. 6 imei, LXX. (ἔσωσεν κύριος) τὸν χριστὸν αὐτοῦ. 

Ps. xxviii. ὃ S17 baba) niyaws ΜΘ, LXX. ὑπερασπιστὴς τῶν σωτη- 
ρίων τοῦ χριστοῦ αὐτοῦ ἐστίν. 

So Ps, Ixxxix. 38, 51, cxxxii. 10, 17. 

Compare Ps. Ixxxiv. 10 Ww, DON, LXX. ὁ θεός...τὸν χριστόν σου. 

It occurs in the plural : : 

Ps, ev. 15, 1 Chron. xvi. 22 ‘0, LXX. οἱ χριστοί μου. 

The full phrase is found : 

Lam. iv. 20 737 mvp, LXX. χριστὸς κύριος. 

Compare Luke ii. 11. 

It will be observed that in all these passages, with the exception of 
those in Leviticus, 2 Sam. i, 21, Dan. ix. 25 f, the Anointed One is always 
spoken of as the Anointed of the Lord or of God. 

The title ypeorés occurs in connexion with κύριος Ecclus. xlvi. 19 The use of 
ἐπεμαρτύρατο ἔναντι κυρίου καὶ χριστοῦ. the term 

It occurs several times also in the Psalms of Solomon : bo πρό 
xvii. 36 (there shall be no unrighteousness, because) πάντες ἅγιοι Psalms of 

καὶ βασιλεὺς αὐτῶν χριστὸς κύριος. Solomon. 
xviii. 8 (happy are they who are) ὑπὸ ῥάβδον παιδείας χριστοῦ κυ- 
piov ἐν φόβῳ θεοῦ αὐτοῦ ἐν σοφίᾳ πνεύματος καὶ δικαιοσύνης καὶ 


ἰσχύος. 
xviii. 6 ...¢is ἡμέραν ἐκλογῆς ἐν ἀνάξει χριστοῦ αὐτοῦ (τοῦ θεοῦ). 
It is found in the Book of Henoch: Henoch. 


c. 48, 10...they have denied the Lord of Spirits and His Anointed. 
c. 52, 4 All these things which thou hast seen minister to the rule 
of His Anointed that he may be strong and mighty upon the earth. 
But even here the title has not become an absolute title (‘the Christ, 
‘the Anointed,’) but describes uue who has the character of ‘an anointed one.’ 


200 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Targums. And it occurs twice in the Targum of Onkelos on the Pentateuch : 
Gen. xlix. τὸ xmindp ΜΠ MoT NMI INT TY, until Messiah 
come, whose is the kingdom. 
Num. xxiv. 17 Ss ΝΠ xainn apy ΝΘ Dip, when 
a king shall arise from Jacob, and a Christ from Israel shall 
rule. 
and commonly in the Targum of Jonathan. Comp. Buxtorf Lez. εν. 


It may be added that it is found also in 4 Esdras vii. 28 f. my Son 
Christ (comp. xii. 32). 
And in the Apocalypse of Baruch: ce. xxiv, xxx, xxxix, xl, Ixx, lxxii. 
The use of From this general view of the use of the word it appears that the 
the term Jimited application of the title to the Divine King and Saviour of Israel 
ee is, with the possible exception of the passage of Daniel, post-Biblical And 
a result of it is likely that the combination of the ideas of a coming of the Lord to 
the study judgment and of the establishment of ἃ Divine Kingdom in Daniel served 
δ πὰ to concentrate attention on the scriptural language in regard to ‘the 
airs ᾿ Anointed of the Lord’ (Luke ii. 26) which was seen to transcend any past 
application. Thus it could not but be felt that every one anointed to a 
special function in the divine economy pointed to One greater in whom all 
that he foreshadowed should find a final accomplishment. The offices of 
king and priest and prophet were concentrated upon ‘the Christ’; and 
now one office and now the other became predominant according to the 
tempers of men. 
Use of the With regard to the usage of St John it may be observed that ὁ χριστός 
Lage is without question uniformly an appellative (‘the Christ,’ ‘the Anointed’) 
* in the Gospel: i. 20, 25, 111, 28, iv. 29, vil. 26 ἔ,, 31, 41 f., x. 24, Xi 27, xii. 
34, Xx. 31 (compare also the use of ypiorés: i. 41, iv. 25, ix. 22). So it is 
also in the first epistle: ii.22,v.1. This large collection of examples seems 
to decide that the same sense must be adopted in 2 John 9; Apoc. xx. 4, 6, 
where otherwise the title might have seemed to be a proper name. 


Additional Note on v. 6. References to the facts of the Gospel. 


Reference The Epistles of St John are permeated with the thoughts of the Person 
a ἐς fact and work of Christ but direct references to the facts of the Gospel are 
Gospel  Singularly rare in them. In the third Epistle there is nothing in the lan- 
in the guage which is distinctively Christian except the pregnant reference to ‘the 
Epistles of Name’ (υ. 7). The Baptism is not spoken of plainly; nor yet any one of the 
St John. crucial events of the Life of the Lord which were included in the earliest 
Confessions of faith, the Birth of the Virgin Mary, the Crucifixion, the 
Resurrection, the Ascension, the Session at the right hand of the Father, 

the Coming to Judgment. 
But though these facts are not expressly mentioned they are all implied, 


and interpreted. Without them the arguments and language of St John 
are unintelligible. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


(1) The Birth of the Virgin Mary: iv. 2 Jesus Christ came in flesh. 

(2) The Baptism: v. 6 This is He that came by water. 

(3) The Passion: iii. 16 He laid down His life for us—v. 6 This is 
He that came...by blood. 

(4) The Resurrection, Ascension and Session at the right hand ‘of 
the Father: ii 1 we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ. 
Comp. 2 John 7...confess that Jesus Christ cometh in flesh ; 1 John i. 3. 

(5) The coming to Judgment: ii. 28 that we may have boldness and 
not be ashamed before Him at His presence ; iii. 2 If He should be mani- 
Sested we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. 2 John 7. 


In addition to these allusions to articles of the Baptismal Creed the 
first Epistle assumes a general knowledge of the Life and Teaching of 
Christ: ii. 6 He that saith he abideth in Him ought himself also to walk 
even as He walked ; iii. 1 The world knoweth us not because it knew Him 
not; ii. 25 the promise which He promised ; iii. 23 as He gave us com- 
mandment. Compare also i. 1 note. 

The revelation of the purpose and issue of Christ’s work is made with 
singular fulness: 

iii. 5 He was manifested to take away sins. 

— 8 The Son of God was manifested that He might destroy the works 

of the devil. 

iv. 9 [God] hath sent His Son, His only Son, that we may live through 

Him. 

— 10[God] sent His Son, as a propitiation for our sins. Comp. ii. 2. 

— 14 The Father hath sent the Son as Saviour of the world. 

y. 20 The Son of God is come and hath given us an understanding that 

we may know Him that is true. 

Comp. i. 7; v. 18. 


Additional Note on the readings in v. 6 f. 
The variations of the three chief Greek mss in the passage otros...pap- 


τυροῦντες deserve to be studied in detail Happily in this case the com- 
mon text follows in the main that of B. 


B. ἐξ. Α. 
οὗτός ἐστιν 6 ἐλθὼν οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ἐλθὼν οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ἐλθὼν 
δ ὕδατος καὶ αἵματος διὰ ὕδατος καὶ αἵματος δι ὕδατος καὶ αἵματος 

καὶ πνεύματος καὶ πνεύματος 

Ἰησοῦς Χριστός" Ἰησοῦς Χριστός" Ἰησοῦς Χριστός" 
οὐκ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι μόνῳ οὐκ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι μόνον οὐκ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι μόνον 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι ἀλλὰ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι 
καὶ ἐν τῷ eh καὶ τῷ pen καὶ ἐν τῷ πνεύματι 
καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα... καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα... καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα... 
ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσὶν ὅτι οἱ τρεῖς εἰσὶν ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσὶν 
οἱ μαρτυροῦντες... οἱ μαρτυροῦντες... οἱ μαρτυροῦντες... 


For τὸ πνεῦμα the Latin Vulgate gives Christus. 


202 


The inter- 
polated 
gloss. 


Summary 


of external 


evidence. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Additional Note on the readings in v. 7, 8. 


The words which are interpolated in the common Greek text in this 
passage (ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ ὁ πατὴρ ὁ λόγος καὶ τὸ ἅγιον πνεῦμα" Kal οὗτοι οἱ τρεῖς 
ἕν εἰσι. καὶ τρεῖς εἰσιν οἱ μαρτυροῦντες ἐν τῇ γῇ) offer an instructive illustra- 
tion of the formation and introduction of a gloss into the apostolic text 
without any signs of bad faith. Happily the gloss was confined within 
narrow limits till the age of printing. If it had been known in the Hast in 
the sixth or seventh century, it is not rash to suppose that it would have 
found wide acceptance just as it did in the printed editions of the Greek 
text, and the evidence would have been complicated though essentially 
unchanged. In this respect the history of the Vulgate reading is of singu- 
lar importance. The mass of later Latin copies which contain the inter- 
polation obviously add nothing to the evidence in favour of the authenti- 
city of the words, and do not even tend to shew that they formed part of 
Jerome's text. 

The state of the external evidence can be summed up very briefly. 

The words are not found 

(1) In any independent Greek ms (more than 180 mss and 50 
lectionaries are quoted). Both the late sss which contain it have un- 
questionably been modified by the Latin Vulgate1. 

(2) In any independent Greek writer. The very few Greek writers 
who make use of the words derived their knowledge of them from the 
Latin (not in Ir Cl.Al Orig Did Athan Bas Greg.Naz Cyr.Al)*. 

(3) In any Latin Father earlier than Victor Vitensis or Vigilius 
Tapsensis (not in Tert Cypr Hil Ambr Hier Aug Leo 15). 

(4) In any ancient version except the Latin; and it was not found 
(a) in the Old Latin in its early form (Tert Cypr Aug), or (Ὁ) in the Vul- 
gate as issued by Jerome (Codd. am fuld) or (c) as revised by Alcuin (Cod. 
vallicell *)4, 

On the other hand the gloss is found from the sixth century in Latin 
Fathers; and it is found also in two copies which give an old Latin text, in 
some early copies of the Vulgate and in the great mass of the later copies 
and in the Clementine text. 

It becomes of interest therefore to observe how the words originally 


1 The Codex Ravianus which was that he connected ‘the word’ and ‘ the 


formerly quoted as a ms authority 
has been shewn to be w copy made 
from printed texts, chiefly from the 
Complutensian, which it follows .in 
this passage. Comp. Griesbach, N. T. 
L.ii. App. 4f. The clause is also written 
on the margin of a Naples ms 173 
‘manu recenti, unius ut mihi vide- 
tur ex bibliothecariis, smc. fine 17’ 
(Tischdf.). 

3 The gloss of Claudius Apollinaris, 
quoted in the note on the text, shews 


spirit’ with v. 8 in a different sense. 

3 Compare Griesbach I. 6. 13 ff. 

4 The words are found in the Theo- 
dulfian Recension (Paris Bibl. Nat. 
Lat. 9380) in the following form: quia 
tres sunt qui testimonium dant in 
terra spiritus aqua et sanguis et tres 
unum sunt; et tres sunt qui testimo- 
nium dicunt in celo pater et filius, et 
spiritus sanctus et hi tres unum sunt 
(Prof. Wordsworth). 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 203 
found a place in the Latin texts, and were carried from that source into 
the Greek text, and into the printed editions of other versions. 


The words are not, as has been already stated, found in any early Latin The origin 

Father ; but a passage of Cyprian, which shews that he was not acquainted of the 
with hem as part of the apostolic text, shews at the same time how μα 
natural it was to form a distinct gloss on v. 7 according to their tenor: 
Dicit dominus: Ego et Pater unum sumus; et iterum de Patre et Filio et 
Spiritu Sancto scriptum est; δέ tres unum sunt (de Eccles. unit. c. 6; 
comp. duct. de rebapt. cc. 15, 19). The force of this application of ‘the 
Spirit and the water and the blood’ with the false reading ‘unum sunt’ for 
‘in unum sunt’ (εἰς τὸ ἔν εἰσιν) is made clear by a later reference to it 
in Facundus:...De Patre et Filio et Spiritu Sancto sic dicit: Tres sunt qui 
testimonium dant in terra, spiritus, aqua et sanguis, et hi tres unum 
sunt; in spiritu significans Patrem, sicut Dominus mulieri Samaritane... 
loquitur...in aqua vero Spiritum Sanctum significans sicut in eodem 
Evangelio exponit (John vii. 37)...in sanguine vero Filium...Quod... 
Johannis apostoli testimonium beatus Cyprianus...in epistola sive libro 
quem de Unitate scripsit de Patre Filio et Spiritu Sancto dictum intelligit 
(Pro def. tr. Cap. i. 3). The same mystical interpretation is found in 
Augustine (c. Maxim. ii. 22), and Eucherius (Jnstruc. i. ad loc. Migne, 
Patr. Lat. 1. 810); and Augustine supplies the word ‘Verbum,’ which 
is required to complete the gloss: Deus itaque summus et verus cum 
Verbo suo et Spiritu Sancto, que tria unum sunt, Deus unus et omnipotens 
(de Civ. ν. 11). 

The gloss which had thus become an established interpretation of St The gloss 
John’s words is first quoted as part of the Epistle in a tract of Priscillian i2serted in 
(+ 385), who quotes the passage with remarkable variations’. Sicut Jo- ete 
hannes ait: ἐγία sunt gue testimonium dicunt in terra, aqua caro et 
sanguis, et hac tria in unum sint; et tria sunt gua testimonium dicunt 
in caelo, pater uerbum et spiritus, et Awe tria unum sunt in Christo 
Jesu. 

The use of the neuter (comp. Eucherius /.c.) in both clauses is peculiar 
and in itself proves conclusively that the passage was not taken directly 
from any Greek text. The substitution of caro for spiritus (transposed) in 
the earthly triad is found also in Vict. Vit. σ. Varim. 5 (p. 204); and 
so the connexion of ix Christo Jesu with the heavenly triad is likewise 
found in one of the quotations from the same group of writings (see 
below). 


1 Itis by no means unlikely that the 
mystical interpretation of v. 8 may 
have taken a definite shape in Africa 
from a very early time. The language 
of Tertullian, which shews conclusively 
that he was not acquainted with the 
words tres unum sunt as scriptural 
phrase, indicates the beginning of its 
growth: adv. Prax. 25...connexus pa- 
tris in filio et filii in paracleto, tres effi- 
cit coherentes, alterum ex altero. Qui 


tres unum sunt non unus; quomodo 
dictum est ego et pater unum sumus 
(John x. 30) ad substantie unitatem, 
non ad numeri singularitatem. It is 
possible that the gloss may have found 
a place in copies of the Latin Version 
as soon as it was definitely shaped; but 
there is no evidence that it was found 
in the text of St John before’ the latter 
part of the 5th century. 
2 Liber Apol. § 4. 


204 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 

On the whole this earliest example of the interpolation recedes farthest 
of all from the original apostolic words; and seems to shew that it took 
shape among a people ignorant of Greek. Perhaps it indicates yet more, 
and points to Spain as the country where it was formed (see below m, 
Codd. Cav. and Tol.). 

The interpolation occurs next in a group of writings which come from 
Africa in the last quarter of the fifth century: 

(1) Ut adhuc luce clarius unius divinitatis esse cum Patre et Filio 
Spiritum Sanctum doceamus, Joannis Evangelist: testimonio comprobatur. 
Ait namque Tres sunt qui testimonium perhibent in celo, Pater, 
Verbum et Spiritus Sanctus, et hi tres unum sunt (Prof. Fid. ap. 
Vict. Vit. de Persec. Vand. iii. 11)1. 

(2) Pater est ingenitus, filius vero sine initio genitus a patre est, 
spiritus autem sanctus processit (Casp. procedit?) a patre et accipit de filio 
sicut evangelista testatur, quia scriptum est: Tres sunt qui dicunt 
testimonium in σοῖο, pater, verbum et spiritus, et hec tria unum sunt, in 
Christo Jesu. Non tamen dixit: unus est in Christo Jesu’ 

It was not unnatural that in the stress of the Arian persecution words 
which were held to give the plain meaning of St John’s words as they were 
read should find their way from the margin into the text, or if they 
had already obtained a place in the text of any copies should gain 
wider currency. But still the form is fluent: 

(3) [Johannes Evangelista] ad Parthos: 7788 sunt, inquit, qui testi- 
monium perhibent in terra, agua sanguis et caro, et tres in nobis 
sunt; et tres sunt qui testimonium perhibent in clo, Pater Verbum 
et Spiritus...et hi (it) tres unum sunt (c. Varim. 5). And again: 
(4)...dicente Joanne Evangelista in epistola sua: Tres sunt qui testi- 
monium dicunt in σοῖο, Pater et Verbum et Spiritus; et in Christo 
Jesu unum sunt, non tamen unus est, quia non est in his una persona (de 
Trin. i. p. 206; Migne, Patr. Lat. lxii. 243). 

From this time the words seem to have maintained partially their 
position in the text. They are quoted by Fulgentius (c. 550) as St John’s 
in the form: Tres sunt qui testimonium perhibent in celo, Pater, Ver- 
bum et Spiritus ; et tres unum sunt (Resp. c. Arian. p. 68, Migne, Patr. 
Lat, \xv. 224); though the same writer in another place (c. Fabian. fragm.) 
speaks of the application of the clause et tres unum sunt to ‘the 
Father, Son and Holy Spirit’ as established by argument, a process wholly 
unnecessary if the gloss had been admitted as part of the text. 

On the other hand the language of Cassiodorus (c. 550) seems to me to 
shew that he did not find the gloss in his text of St John, though he 


1 The authorship of this ‘Exposition 


of the Faith’ is uncertain. It is per- 
haps a later addition to the history of 
Victor (Papencordt, Gesch. ἃ. Vand. 
Herrsch. 369 n.); but in no case does it 
prove more than that the words were 
found in the copy of the Epistle used 
by the writer. 


? This remarkable form of the gloss 
has been printed by Caspari in an Ez- 
positio fidet preserved in the Ambro- 
sian ws which contains also the Mura- 
torian fragment on the Canon (Kirchen- 
hist. Anecdota, pp. xxiv. 305 and 
notes). 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 205 
accepted it as a true interpretation of the apostle’s words. Cui rei [quia 
Jesus est Christus], he writes, testificantur in terra tria mysteria, aqua 
sanguis et spiritus, quee in passione Domini leguntur impleta; in czlo 
autem Pater et Filius et Spiritus Sanctus; et hi tres unus est Deus (Com- 
plex. in Epp. ad loc. Migne, Patr. Lat. 1xx. pp. 1372 ἢ}. 

Not long afterwards the addition was expressly defended in ‘a Prologue Expressly 
to the seven canonical Epistles’ issued under the name of Jerome, which #firmed 
seems to have been written with this express purpose: [In prima Johannis “ee 
Epistola] ab infidelibus translatoribus multum erratum esse a fidei veritate 
comperimus, trium tantum vocabula, hoc est, aque sanguinis et spiritus, 
in ipsa sua editione ponentibus et Patris, Verbique ac Spiritus testimonium 
omittentibus ; in quo maxime et fides catholica roboratur et Patris ac Filii 
ac Spiritus Sancti una divinitatis substantia comprobatur (Migne, Patrol. 
Lat. xxix. 829 f.). 

This Prologue is found in one of the earliest copies of the Vulgate 
(Codex Fuldensis) written in 546, though the gloss itself is not found in 
the text of the Epistle. 

But the gloss is found in early mss both of the Old Latin and of the The 
Vulgate, and in substantially the same form, so that it must have been estliest 
introduced into both from the same source. These are (a) (of the old Latin) we 8 

: : : oe ority 
a Speculum (a classified series of Scriptural passages) m (seec. viii. or ix.) for it, 
and a Munich fragment q (cod. Fris. sec. vi. or vii.); (Ὁ) of the Vulgate, 
the Spanish (Visigothic) mss Cod. Cav. (sec. ix.) and Cod. Tol. (sec. x.). 


The whole passage appears in these authorities in the following form : 


authentic. 


Cod. Fris? Spec. (m). Codd. Cav. Tol. 
quoniam tr quoniam tres sunt qui = guia tres sunt qui 
: testimonium dicunt testimonium dant 
in terra in terra in terra 


spiritus θέ aqua et sa 


tificantur 
in caelo 
pater ὁ 


tres unum sunt. 


spiritus aqua et san- 
guis ; 

et hi tres unum sunt 

in Christo Jesu. 

Ht tres sunt 

qui testimonium dicunt 

in caelo 

Pater verbum et spiri- 
tus 

et hi tres unum sunt. 


spiritus e¢ aqua et san- 
guis; 

et hi tres unum sunt 

in Christo Jesu. 

et (om Tol) tres sunt 

qui testimonium dicunt 

in caelo 

pater verbum et spiri- 
tus 

et hi tres unum sunt. 


Here, it will be observed, the testimony on earth is placed first, so that 


1 The passage of Cassiodorus is well 
discussed by Bp Turton in his Vindi- 
cation of Porson, pp. 279 ff. 

2 The ms is unfortunately mutilated. 
About half of each line is lost. The 
lines of the ms so far as they are pre- 
served run thus: 


quiaspsestueritas qmtr 
in terra. spsetaquaetsa 


tificanturincaelop tere 
tresunumsunt sitestim 


There is room in each line for about 21 
moreletters. Itisnot possible therefore 
that the words et hi tres unum sunt in 
Christo Jesu could have formed part of 
the text. It is further to be noticed 
that this ms reads spiritus in v. 6 for 
Christus. 


206 


Modifica- 
tion of the 
text. 


The first 
appear- 
ance of 
the words 
in Greek, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


the heavenly testimony retains its position as an interpretative gloss. And 
there is also a second similar though shorter gloss in Christo Jesu which 
is even older than that which follows ; for itis indicated in the Latin transla- 
tion of the Outlines’ of Clement of Alexandria: δέ hi tres unum sunt: in 
salvatore quippe istae sunt virtutes salutiferae, et vita ipsa in ipso Filio 
ejus existit (p. rorr P.). 

After a time the second gloss in Christo Jesu was omitted; and the 
two clauses were transposed; so that the passage assumed the form which 
was generally current in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and was 
finally pronounced authentic in the Sixtine and Clementine editions of the 
Vulgate. The main forms in which the passage appears in the Latin texts 
are given in the following table : 


Cod. Cav. 


quia tres sunt qui 

testimonium dant 

in terra, 

spiritus et agua et san- 
guis ; 

et Az tres unum sunt 

in Christo Jesu 

et tres sunt qui 

testimonium dicunt 

in caelo, 

pater verbum et spiri- 
His 3 

et hi tres unum sunt. 


Cod. Vallicell.** 


quoniam tres sunt qui 

testimonium dant 

in terra, 

spiritus aqua et san- 
guis ; 

et tres unum sunt 


sicut tres sunt qui 

testimonium dant 

in caelo, 

pater verbum et spiri- 
tus sanctus ; 

et tres unum sunt. 


Common Text. 


quoniam tres sunt qui 

testimonium dant 

in caelo, 

pater verbum et spiri- 
tus sanctus ; 

et Ai tres unum sunt. 


et tres sunt qui 

testimonium dant 

in terra, 

spiritus et aqua et san- 
guts ; 

et hi tres unum sunt? 


Here the history of the Latin interpolation ends: we have to notice 


how it passed into the Greek text. 


It appears first in a Greek version of 


the Acts of the Council of Lateran held in 1215, eoeval with the Council. 
The Latin text is: Quemadmodum in canonica Johannis epistola legitur : 
Quia tres sunt qui testimonium dant in σοῖο, Pater, Verbum et Spiritus 
Sanctus; et hi tres unum sunt. Statimque subjungitur: et tres sunt 
qui testimonium dant in terra, spiritus aqua et sanguis ; et tres unum 
sunt, sicut in quibusdam codicibus legitur’. For this the corresponding 
Greek, as far as it has been preserved, is: ὃν τρόπον ἐν τῇ κανονικῇ τοῦ 


1 Another form of the reading pre- 
served in ὦ St Gall ms: Quia tres 
sunt qui testimonium dant spiritus et 
aqua et sanguis, et tres unum sunt. 
Sicut in eexlo tres sunt, Pater Verbum 
et Spiritus, et tres unum sunt (Dob- 
bin, Codex Montfort. p. 45), points 
clearly to the original gloss-form of 
the addition. This ms is now in the 
British Museum (Add. 11,852) and 
was formerly in the possession of Bp 
Butler. (See Dict. of Bible, Vulgate, 
p. 1713 n. q). A Greek ms has notes 
in v. 8 τουτέστι τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον καὶ ὁ 
πατὴρ καὶ αὐτὸς ἑαυτοῦ and on ἕν εἰσι: 


τουτέστι μία θεότης, εἷς θεός (Tischdf. ad 
loc.). 

5 This last clause is omitted in many 
late uss. Some account of the Latin 
uss known up to his time is given by 
Bp Turton, Ul. ὦ. pp. r4r f. Gries- 
bach 1. c. 12 calculates that the gloss is 
omitted by 5ο---ὅο uss of the Vulgate. 
In collections which he mentions it is 
omitted by 18 mss out of an aggregate 
of 234. 

3 This remark refers to the last 
words et tres unum sunt which were 
omitted by many late uss of the Vul- 
gate, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 207 
Ἰωάννου ἐπιστολῇ ἀναγινώσκεται ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσιν of μαρτυροῦντες ἐν οὐρανῷ, ὁ 
πατὴρ, λόγος καὶ πνεῦμα ἅγιον" καὶ τοῦτοι (sic) οἱ τρεῖς ἔν εἰσιν. 
προστίθησι *** καθὼς ἔν τισι κώδηξιν εὑρίσκεται. 

The clause was quoted afterwards incompletely by Manuel Calecas (8880. 
xiv.), and perhaps by Jos. Bryennius (svc. xv.), who both wrote under 
Latin influence; and at last it found a place in a Greeco-Latin ms of the 
Epistle (Cod. Vat. Ottob. 162) of the fifteenth century, and in a Greek ms 
of the sixteenth century (Cod. Montfort. Dubil. 34, the Codex Britannicus 
of Erasmus). The Greek text in both these mss has been adapted in other 
places to the Latin Vulgate; and in this passage both follow a late Latin 
text in omitting the εἰς τὸ ἕν εἰσι after the earthly witness. The language 
of both, especially that of Cod. Montfort., shews decisively that the Greek 
is a translation of the Latin’. 


εὐθύς τε 


The passage is thus given in the two Mss: 


Cod. Montf. (34). 


Cod. Vat. Ottob. (162). 


ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσὶν 

οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 

ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, 

πατὴρ λόγος καὶ πνεῦμα 
ἅγιον" 

καὶ οὗτοι οἱ τρεῖς 

ἕν εἰσι: 

καὶ τρεῖς εἰσὶν 

οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 

ἐν τῇ γῇ; 

πνεῦμα ὕδωρ καὶ αἷμα" 


quia tres sunt 

qui testimonium dant 

in caelo, 

pater verbum et spiri- 
tus sanctus: 

et hi tres 

unum sunt. 

et tres sunt 

qui testimonium dant 

in terra, 

spiritus aqua et san- 
guis 

si testimonium. 


” rs 
ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσὶν 
οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 
ἀπὸ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, 
. ci 
πατὴρ λόγος καὶ πνεῦμα 
7 
ἅγιον" 
καὶ οἱ τρεῖς 
ae rae: 
εἰς τὸ ἕν εἰσι" 
καὶ τρεῖς εἰσὶν 
οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 
ree a aie 
ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, 
Ν - Ἔν αν ay 
τὸ πνεῦμα TO ὕδωρ καὶ 
τὸ αἷμα: 


εἰ τὴν μαρτυρίαν... εἰ τὴν μαρτυρίαν... 

The Complutensian editors introduced another translation of the Vul- The intro- 
gate similar to that in Cod. 162, into their text?, Meanwhile Erasmus duction of 
had published his first edition giving the whole passage as he found it in a 
his Greek ms with the note: In Greeco codice tantum hoc reperio de testi- printed 
monio triplici ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσὶν of μαρτυροῦντες τὸ πνεῦμα Kal τὸ ὕδωρ καὶ τὸ Greek 
αἷμα; and on the clause δέ hi tres unum sunt, which he retained in his text. 
translation, he writes: Hi redundat: Neque est unum sed in unum, εἰς 
τὸ αὐτό. i. sive in idem. In his third edition, in fulfilment of a promise 
which he had made to insert the clause if it could be shewn to exist in a 
single Greek ms, he inserted the words on the authority of the Cod. 
Montfort. retaining however the words καὶ οἱ τρεῖς εἰς τὸ ἕν εἰσιν. 

The words were afterwards brought into a more correct shape without 
any manuscript authority; and at last the passage assumed the form which 


1 It has been shewn by Dr Dobbin text of Cod. 162 is very peculiar. Is it 


that Cod. Montf. is ‘a transcript with 
arbitrary and fanciful variations’ of 
the ms in Lincoln College, Oxford 39, 
in which the gloss is not found (Codex 
Montfortianus, p. 57)- 

2 The ἀπὸ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ in the Greek 


possible that ἐπί has been misread 
ἀπό, as was done in the corresponding 
clause, and that the translator in- 
tended ἐπὶ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ to answer ex- 
actly to ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ἢ 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


is given in the texts of Stephanus in 1550 and Elzevir of 1633 (‘text. rec.’), 
and from them has assumed general currency. 

The chief forms in which the whole passage appears in early printed 
texts are given in the following table: 


Erasm. Ed. 1, 1516. 
ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσὶν 
οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 
* * 


* ** 


RR Re 
* OK OR KOK 


τὸ πνεῦμα κ καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ 
καὶ τὸ αἷμα: 
καὶ οἱ τρεῖς 
Το ΑΓ, ἢ 
εἰς τὸ ἕν εἰσιν. 
εἰ τὴν μαρτυρίαν... 


Ed. Compl. 1514 (Cod. 


Rat.). 

ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσὶν 

οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 

ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ 

ὁ πατὴρ καὶ ὁ λόγος καὶ 
τὸ ἅγιον πνεῦμα 

καὶ οἱ τρεῖς 

εἰς τὸ ἕν εἰσι. 

καὶ τρεῖς εἰσὶν 

οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 

ἐπ ὶ τῆς γῆς 

τὸ πνεῦμα καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ 
καὶ τὸ αἷμα. 


* * 
? = ’ 
εἰ THY μαρτυρίαν... 


Erasm. Ed. 3, 1522. 
Ore τρεῖς εἰσὶν 
οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 
ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, 
πατὴρ λόγος καὶ 
πνεῦμα ἅγιον" 
καὶ οὗτοι οἱ τρεῖς 
ἕν εἰσι. 
καὶ τρεῖς εἰσὶν 
οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 
TY) 66. 
πνεῦμα καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ 
αἷμα- 
καὶ οἱ τρεῖς 
εἰς τὸ ἔν εἰσιν. 
εἰ τὴν μαρτυρίαν... 


Erasm. Ed. 3, 1522. 


ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσὶν 

οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 

ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ 

πατὴρ "λόγος καὶ πνεῦ- 
μα ἅγιον 

καὶ οὗ τοι οἱ τρεῖς 

ἕν εἰσι. 

καὶ τρεῖς εἰσὶν 

οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 

ἐν τε, 

πνεῦμα καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ 
αἷμα. 

καὶ οἱ τρεῖς 

εἰς τὸ ἕν εἰσιν. 

εἰ τὴν μαρτυρίαν... 


Erasm. Ed. 4, 1527. 
ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσὶν 
οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 
ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, 
ὁ πατὴρ, ὁ λόγος, καὶ 
τὸ πνεῦμα ἅγιον" 
καὶ οὗτοι οἱ τρεῖς 
ἕν εἶσι. 
καὶ τρεῖς εἰσὶν 
οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 
ἐν τῇ γῇ,Ἠ 
πνεῦμα καὶ 
αἷμα: 
καὶ οἱ τρεῖς 
εἰς τὸ ἕν εἰσιν. 
εἰ τὴν μαρτυρίαν... 


ὕδωρ καὶ 


Ed. Steph. 1550; Elz. 
1633 (text. rec.). 

ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσὶν 

οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 

ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ 

ὁ πατὴρ ὁ λόγος καὶ τὸ 
ἅγιον πνεῦμα 

καὶ οὗτοι οἱ τρεῖς 

ἕν εἰσι. 

καὶ τρεῖς εἰσὶν 

οἱ μαρτυροῦντες 

ἐν τῇ γῇ 

τὸ πνεῦμα καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ 
καὶ τὸ αἷμα. 

καὶ οἱ τρεῖς 

εἰς τὸ ἔν εἰσι. 

εἰ τὴν μαρτυρίαν... 


1 A note is added which seems to 
shew that the editors found the fol- 
lowing clause καὶ ---εἰσίν in their Greek 
uss: Sanctus Thomas in expositione 
secunde decretalis de sermone Trini- 
tate et Fide Catholica tractans istum 
passum contra Abbatem Joachim viz. 
Tres sunt qui testimonium dant incealo, 
pater verbum et spiritus sanctus, dicit 
ad litteram verba sequentia. Et ad 
insinuandam unitatem trium per- 
sonarum subditur, et hii tres unum 
sunt. Quod quidem dicitur propter 
essentia unitatem. Sed hoc Joachim 
perverse trahere volens ad unitatem 


charitatis et consensus inducebat con- 
sequentem auctoritatem. Nam _ sub- 
ditur ibidem: et tres sunt qui testi- 
monium dant in terra S. spiritus aqua 
et sanguis. Et in quibusdam libris 
additur: et hii tres unum sunt. Sed 
hoc in veris exemplaribus non ha- 
betur: sed dicitur esse appositum ab 
hereticis Arrianis ad pervertendum 
intellectum sanum auctoritatis pre- 
misse de unitate essentim trium per- 
sonarum. Hac beatus Thomas ubi | 
supra. ὶ 

This is, as far as I have observed, 
the only note of the kind in the New 





THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 209 

When the gloss had gained a place in the Greek text it naturally influ- 
enced the texts of other versions. Guthir and Schaaf introduced with very 
slight modifications a translation which had been made by Tretnellius into 
their printed texts of the Peshito!. It was introduced into editions of the 
Armenian and Slavonic Versions; and into the modern European versions. 

The supposed dogmatic importance of the gloss has given a value to 
the evidence in its favour out of all proportion to its critical weight. The 
Ms authority, for example, for the spurious Epistle to the Laodicenes is 
essentially the same. This also is supported hy m, and by the Za Cava and 
Toledo mss and by a multitude of later mss of the Vulgate. In the pre- 
ceding verse (v. 6) of the Epistle almost all Latin authorities read Christus 
for Spiritus (τὸ πνεῦμα). A remarkable group of ancient authorities of the 
same type including Cod. Tul. add to c. ii. 17 guomodo Deus manet in 
ceternum. Inc. v. 20, m and Cod. Tol., with Hilary substantially, add 
a clause very similar in character to the gloss on v. 8; and in the same 
verse m. Cod. Montf. with the Lat vg (Hil Ambr Vigil Fulg Leo) read 
simus (ὦμεν). 

It will also have been observed that the gloss itself sprang from a false 
reading «nem for in unum, a change due to an omission which was equally 
easy in Greek (τρεῖς εἰς) and in Latin. 


Additional Note on v. 16. Stn unto death. 


The phrase ‘sin unto death’ is introduced as one which was familiar to The 
the readers of the Epistle and is evidently borrowed from current language. aan 
And so in fact the distinction of ‘sins unto death’ and ‘sins not unto death’ death? in 
is common among Rabbinic writers (Schoettgen ad loc.) and represents, it use among 
cannot be doubted, an old traditional view. Comp. Is. ii. 9; xxii. 14. Jews. 

1. In the first and simplest sense a ‘sin unto death’ would be a sin A an 
requiring the punishment of natural death: comp. Num. xviii. 22 ἁμαρτία Tile by 
θανατηφόρος". Death in such a case was final exclusion from the Divine death. 
Society. 


Testament. The treatment of the pas- 
sage is wholly exceptional ; for else- 
where the Edition marks prominently 
in the Greek text the absence of Latin 
additions: e.g. Acts viii. 37, 1x. 5, 6, 
x. 6, xiv. 7, Xv. 413 1 John ii. 23; 2 
John 11; and conversely the absence 
of words found in the Greek text 
from the Latin: e.g. Acts x. 21, 32, 
Xv. 243 1 Pet, iii, 12, iv. 14; 1 John 
v. 13. 

1 Gutbir’s note is worth quoting: 
Cum notum sit Arrianos nec ipsi Greco 
Textui nec Versionibus Orientalibus 
hic pepercisse, ex Notis Tremellii hune 


Ww. J. 


versum in aliis E, E. desideratum 
adscripsimus. Schaaf’s note is to the 
same effect. 

2 Origen identifies the two phrases: 
ἐπὶ ἁμαρτήμασι τοῖς μὴ πρὸς θάνατον ἣ 
ὡς ὠνόμασεν ἐν ᾿Αριθμοῖς ὁ νόμος τοῖς 
μὴ θανατηφόροις (in Matt. T. x11. § 30). 
In another passage he treats the in- 
fliction of death as the complete ex- 
piation of the crime for which it is 
inflicted: Absolvitur peccatum per pee- 
nam mortis, nec superest aliquid quod 
pro hoc crimine judicii dies et pena 
eterni ignis inveniat (Hom. in Lev. xiv. 
δ 4). 


14 


210 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


A sin of 2. It was a natural extension of this meaning when the phrase was 
the same sed for an offence which was reckoned by moral judgment to belong to 
οἸδξϑ: the same class. Words very closely resembling those of St John are used 
Test. xii. Patr. Issach. 7 οὐκ ἔγνων ἐν ἐμοὶ (al. én’ ἐμέ) ἁμαρτίαν εἰς (for 
πρὸς) θάνατον. Comp. 1 Cor. v. 11. 
A sin 3. If now the same line of thought is extended to the Christian Society, 
carrying jt, will appear that a sin which in its very nature excludes from fellowship 
ae with Christians would be rightly spoken of as a ‘sin unto death.’ Such a 
Christian 81 may be seen in hatred of the brethren (c. iii. 15), or in the selfishness 
society if which excludes repentance, the condition of forgiveness (i. 7), or in the 
persisted faithlessness which denies Christ, the One Advocate (v. 21; iv. 2). But in 
ἐδ each case the character of the sin is determined by the effect which it has 
on the relation of the doer to God through Christ in the Divine Society. 
We are not to think of specific acts, defined absolutely, but of acts as the 
revelation of moral life. 
Death the 4. It must be noticed further that St John speaks of the sin as ‘tend- 
tendency ing to death’ (πρὸς θάνατον) and not as necessarily involving death. Death 
not the is, so to speak, its natural consequence, if it continue, and not its inevitable 
necessary_.. ἃ δὰ 
issue. issue as a matter of fact. Its character is assumed to be unquestionable, 
and its presence open and notorious. 


The mode 5. The question then could not but arise, How is such flagrant sin in a 
of dealing brother—a fellow Christian—to be dealt with? For it must be remember- 
nee ed that the words of the apostle are directed to those who are members of 
: the Christian Church, sharing in the privileges of the common life. The 
answer follows naturally from a view of the normal efficacy of Christian 
intercession. The power of prayer avails for those who belong to the 
Body (comp. John xiii. 10). But for those who are separated from the 
Body for a time or not yet included in it the ordinary exercise of the 
energy of spiritual sympathy has, so far as we are taught directly, no pro- 
mise of salutary influence. The use of common prayer in such cases is not 
enjoined ; though it must be observed that it is not forbidden. St John 
does not command intercession when the sin is seen, recognised by the 
brother, in its fatal intensity; but on the other hand he does not expressly 
exclude it. Even if the tenour of his words may seem to dissuade such 
prayer, it is because the offender lies without the Christian Body, excluded 

from its life but yet not beyond the creative, vivifying power of God. 


In some 6. We can understand in some degree how such sins, either in men or in 
is ὶ nations, must be left to God. Chastisement and not forgiveness is the one 
mnermos* way to restoration’. The book of the prophet Jeremiah is a divine lesson 


1 The truth finds a noble expression Anywhere, sky or sea or world at all: 
in Browning’s The Ring and the Book: Butthe night's black was burst through 


The Pope, 2116 ft. by a blaze— 
: ᾿ Thunder struck blow on blow, earth 
For the main criminal I see no hope groaned and bore, 
Except in such a suddenness of fate, Through her whole length of mountains 
I stood at Naples once, a night so dark visible: 
I could have scarce conjectured there There lay the city thick and plain with 
was earth 


spires, 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 211 


And chastise- 
ment ne- 
cessary. 


of the necessity of purification through death for a faithless people. 
the fortunes of Israel seem to illustrate the character of God's dealings 
with men, 


7. The patristic comments upon the passage offer an instructive Patristic 
subject for study. comments. 


CueMeEnNT of Alexandria in discussing the different kinds of voluntary Crement 
and wrong action (Strom. ii. 15, § 66) refers to the language of St John as oF Aurx- 
shewing that he recognised differences in sin (aiverat...ras διαφορὰς τῶν ῬΗΤΆ. 
ἁμαρτιῶν ἐκδιδάσκων), and quotes as illustrating the kind of distinction to 
which he refers Ps. i. 1, but he gives no classification of specific offences. 


TERTULLIAN naturally lays down a clear and definite interpretation : Terrut- 
‘Who, he asks, can escape from the sin of rash anger...of breaking engage- LIAN. 
‘ments, of speaking falsely through shame or necessity...so that if there 
‘were no pardon for such acts, no one could be saved. Of these then there 
‘will be pardon through Christ, our Advocate with the Father. There are 
“however offences of a different character, heavier and deadly, such as admit 
‘no pardon, murder, idolatry, fraud, denial [of Christ], blasphemy, and 
‘assuredly also adultery and fornication, and every other violation of the 
‘temple of God. For these Christ will no longer plead: these he who has 
‘been born of God will absolutely not commit, as he will not be a son of 
‘God, if he has committed them 1.’ 


OrIcEN speaks with wise reserve; after referring to 1 Cor. iii. 15, Matt. Oricen. 
xvi. 26, he continues, ‘There are some sins which are to loss (ad damnum)... 
‘some to destruction (ad interitum)...What kind of sins however are sins 
‘to death, what not to death but to loss, cannot, I think, easily be deter- 
‘mined by any man’ (Hom. in Ex. x. § 3°). 


And, like a ghost disshrouded, white 
the sea. 


ergo erit venia per exoratorem patris 
Christum. Sunt autem et contraria 


So may the truth be flashed out by 
one blow, 

And Guido see, one instant, and be 
saved. 


With this compare Guido’s last words, 

Abate— Cardinal — Christ—Maria— 

God— 

Pompilia, will you let them murder 

me? 

1 De pudic. 19, Cui enim non ac- 
cidit aut irasci inique et ultra solis 
occasum, aut et manum immittere, 
aut facile maledicere, aut temere ju- 
rare, aut fidem pacti destruere, aut 
verecundia aut necessitate mentiri; 
in negotiis, in officiis, in questu, in 
victu, in visu, in auditu, quanta 
tentamur; ut si nulla sit venia isto- 
rum nemini salus competeret. Horum 


istis, ut graviora et exitiosa, que ve- 
niam non capiant, homicidium, idolo- 
latria, fraus, negatio, blasphemia, uti- 
que et meechia et fornicatio... Horum 
ultra exorator non erit Christus. Hee 
non admittet omnino qui natus ex 
Deo fuerit, non futurus Dei filius si 
admiserit. The classification is in- 
structive. In an earlier chapter (ὁ. 2) 
he divides sins into ‘remissible’ and 
‘irremissible’: the former are fit sub- 
jects of intercession, the latter not, 
and he concludes: Secundum hance 
differentiam delictorum pcenitentie 
quoque conditio discriminatur. Alia 
erit que veniam consequi possit, in 
delicto scilicet remissibili; alia que 
consequi nullo modo possit, in delicto 
scilicet irremissibili. 

2 Comp. in Jah. Tom, 11. (Iv. p. 62 

14—2 


212 


Hivary. 


AMBROSE. 


JEROME. 


Aveus- 
TINE. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Hiary brings out an important aspect of the truth. ‘There is,’ he 
says, ‘a limit to mercy (misericordic), and justice must be used in shewing 
‘pity. We can feel sorrow for those whose crimes are great, but there is 
‘no room for mercy. For mercy turns to ask pardon of God for that which 
‘is done; but to give pardon to wrong deeds is not to shew mercy but not 
‘to observe justice in mercy. This consideration the apostle John observed 
‘most carefully saying: Si quis scit fratrem suum delinquere sed non ad 
‘mortem, petat et dabit illi Deus vitam. Est enim peccatum ad mortem 
‘sed non pro eo dico’ (in cal. Psalm. § 8). 

AMBROSE regards the direction of St John as applying to the general 
action of the Church but not as excluding absolutely all intercession. ‘He 
‘did not speak to a Moses (Ex. xxxii. 31 f.) or a Jeremiah (Jer. xiv. 11; vii. 
“16; Baruch iii. 1 ἢ; v. 1), but to the people, who required to employ 
‘another to pray for their own sins; for whom it is enough if they pray 
‘God for lighter faults, and think that the pardon of graver must be re- 
‘served for the prayers of the just’ (de peenit. i. 10). 


JEROME combines the language of 1 Sam. 11, 25 with that of St John, 
when he is insisting on the different degrees of the heinousness of sins. 
‘Qui scit fratrem suum peccare peccatum non ad mortem, petat, et dabit 
‘et vitam peccanti non ad mortem. Qui vero peccaverit ad mortem quis 
‘orabit pro eo?’ ‘You see,’ he continues, ‘that if we pray for smaller sins we 
‘obtain pardon; if for greater, the obtaining pardon is difficult; and that 
‘there is a great interval between some sins and others’ (adv. Jovin. ii. § 30). 

The interpretation of AucustrNE is of great interest. His commentary 
on the verse of St John’s Epistle is not preserved, but in his treatise on the 
Sermon on the Mount (c. Α. Ὁ. 393) he treats of the passage, and says : 
Aperte ostendit esse quosdam fratres pro quibus orare non nobis preecipi- 
tur, cum Dominus etiam pro peccatoribus nostris orare jubeat...Peccatum 
ergo fratris ad mortem puto esse cum post agnitionem Dei per gratiam 
Domini nostri Jesu Christi quisque oppugnat fraternitatem et adversus 
ipsam gratiam qua reconciliatus est Deo invidentise facibus agitatur (de 
Serm. Dom. i.22, 73). In reviewing this passage afterwards in his Retrac- 
tationes (c. A. D. 4226—7) he writes: Quod quidem non confirmavi, quoniam 
hoc putare me dixi: sed tamenu addendum fuit, si in hac tam scelerata 
mentis perversitate finierit hanc vitam; quoniam de quocunque pessimo in 
hac vita constituto non est utique desperandum, nec pro illo imprudenter 
oratur de quo non desperatur (Retract. i. το, 7). 

He developes this idea of deliberate persistence in evil in treating of 
the sin against the Holy Spirit: 


R.). In Hom. in Lev. tv. ὃ 5 Origen 
compares with 1 John v. 16 the words 
in 1 Sam. ii. 25; and in the treatise 


tation in his Commentary; and after- 
wards a singular alternative: Potest 
etiam peccatum usque ad mortem ac- 


On Prayer (§ 28) he follows out the 
comparison, implying that sins of 
idolatry, adultery and fornication are 
not to be remitted by the prayer and 
offerings of the Church. 

1 Bede silently quotes this interpre- 


cipi, pro quo rogare quempiam vetat, 
quia scilicet peccatum quod in hac vita 
non corrigitur ejus venia frustra post 
mortem postulatur. But he prefers 
Augustine’s view. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 213 


Hoc [peccatum in Spiritum Sanctum] est duritia cordis usque ad finem 
huius vitee qua homo recusat in unitate corporis Christi, quod vivificat 
Spiritus Sanctus, remissionem accipere peccatorum...Huic ergo dono 
gratize Dei quicunque restiterit et repugnaverit vel quoquo modo fuerit ab 
eo alienus usque in finem vitee non remittetur ei neque in hoc seculo 
neque in futuro ; hoc scilicet tam grande peccatum ut eo teneantur cuncta 
peccata quod non probatur ab aliquo esse commissum nisi cum de corpore 
exierit (Zpist. clxxx. v (1), xi.§ 49). No one can be pronounced guilty of it 
while life still continues: Hzec blasphemia Spiritus, cui nunquam est ulla 
remissio,... non potest in quoquam, ut diximus, dum in hac adhuc vita est 
deprehendi (Serm. Ixxi. 3, 21). 


The fatal consequences of the sin are, he points out, involved in its 
essential character : 


Ille peccat in Spiritum Sanctum qui, desperans vel irridens atque con- 
temnens preedicationem gratiz per quam peccata diluuntur et pacis per 
quam reconciliamur Deo, detrectat agere poenitentiam de peccatis suis et 
in eorum impia atque mortifera quadam suavitate perdurandum sibi esse 
decernit et in finem usque perdurat (in Ep. ad Rom. § 14; comp. ὃ 22). 

Quisquis igitur reus fuerit impcenitentize contra Spiritum in quo unitas 
et societas communionis congregatur Ecclesiz nunquam illi remittetur ; 
quia hoc sibi clausit ubi remittitur...(Sermo Ixxi. 21, 34). 


For chastisement is the way to restoration: Plane si in tantas ieris 
iniquitates ut repellas a te virgam verberantis, si repellas manum flagellantis 
et de disciplina Dei indigneris et fugias a Patre cedente et nolis eum 
Patrem pati quia non parcit peccanti, tu te alienasti ab heereditate, ipse te 
non abjecit; nam si maneres fiagellatus non remaneres exhzereditatus (71 
Psalm. \xxxviii. Serm. ii. § 3). 


Curysostom, like several earlier writers, connects the passage in St Curyso- 
John with the words of Eli (1 Sam. ii. 25), and finds the description of the Sto™- 
sin in-Ps. xlix. 18ff The fatal consequences which it brings are due to 
the accompanying wilful impenitence. ‘How,’ he adds, ‘can (God) forgive 
‘one who does not allow that he has sinned, and does not repent? For 
‘when we ask medicine from the physician we shew him the wound’ (in 
Ps, xiix. § 7). 

In a letter attributed to Genasius the issue of the sin in death is Gexasios. 
made to lie wholly in impenitence. He has spoken of the sin of here- 
tics against the Holy Spirit which was incapable of forgiveness as long as 
they persisted in it; and then he goes on: ‘As the passage of the apostle 
‘John rung in like sense: Est peccatum ad mortem, non dico ut oretur 
‘pro eo; et est peceatum non ad mortem, dico ut oretur pro eo. There is 
‘a sin unto death when men abide in the same sin: there is a sin not 
‘unto death when men abandon the same sin. There is no sin for the 
“remission of which the Church does not pray, or which it cannot absolve 
‘when men cease from it in virtue of the power given to it from God’... 

(Cod. Can. Eccles. xlvii. § 5; Migne, Patrol, Lat. \vi. p. 622). 


(cumentus, in the same spirit, when commenting upon the passage Cicume- 
sees the ground of thé apostle’s instruction in the absence of all signs of StUS. 


Distine- 
tion of 
‘venial’ 
and 
‘mortal’ 
sins. 


The 
Father 
the source 
of life. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


repentance in him ‘who sins a sin unto death.’ The brother is not to pray 
for such an one, he says, ‘for he will not be heard, because he asks amiss, 
‘speaking for one who shews no intention of return (περὶ τοῦ μηδεμίαν 
« ἐπιδεικνυμένου ἐπιστροφήν). For this sin is alone unto death that has no 
‘regard to repentance (ἡ μὴ πρὸς μετάνοιαν ἀφορῶσα), from which Judas 
‘suffered and was brought under the eternal death’ (ad loc.)1. 

8. The language of St Jolin gave occasion to the current distinction of 
sins as ‘mortal’ and ‘venial.’ In Augustine this distinction occurs fre- 
quently under the contrast of ‘ crimina’ (i Joh. xli.9 crimen est peccatum 
gravi accusatione et damnatione dignissimum) and ‘peccata’: c. duas Epp. 
Pel. i. § 28; in Ps. exviii. 3, 2; de perfec. Just. Hom. ix. 20; Enchirid. 
c. Ixiv. So he writes: Non peccata sola sunt illa que crimina nominantur, 
adulteria, fornicationes, sacrilegia, furta, rapinee, falsa testimonia: non ipsa 
sola peccata sunt. Attendere aliquid quod non debebas peccatum est; 
audire aliquid libenter quod audiendum non fuit peccatum est; cogitare 
aliquid quod non fuit cogitandum peccatum est (Serm. celxxi. 9, 9). 

The later technical distinction is well summed up by RicHarp of St Victor 
who discussed the difference in a brief tract: Mortale peccatum, quantum 
mihi videtur, triplici recte ratione distinguitur, Mortale est quod a quovis 
non potest committi sine grandi corruptione sui. Item mortale est quod 
non potest committi sine gravi lesione proximi. Mortale nihilominus quod 
non potest committi sine magno contemptu Dei. Cetera vero omnia viden- 
tur mihi venialia (Migne, Patrol. Lat. 196, p. 1193). 


Additional Note (1) on v. 20. The idea of Life. 


The idea of ‘Life’ in St John has been already touched upon in the 
note on i. 1; but it requires to be discussed somewhat more in detail. For 
the characteristic message which St John gives is of a life through which 
fellowship with man and God—the end of human existence—is perfectly 
realised. 


i. The Source of Life. 

Of the Father alone it is said that He ‘hath life in Himself’ as the 
absolute final source of all life. This is the last limit of thought: John v. 
26 ὁ πατὴρ ἔχει ζωὴν ἐν ἑαυτῷ, the Father hath life in Himself (comp. 
1 Tim. vi. 16). 

At the same time it is made known that the Father communicated to 
the Son the absolute possession of life: in this is expressed the idea of 
Sonship. The Son ‘hath life in Himself, but not as the final source of 
life. John v. 26 ὥσπερ ὁ πατὴρ ἔχει ζωὴν ἐν ἑαυτῷ, οὕτως καὶ τῷ υἱῷ ἔδωκεν 


1 In the Council of Troyes a.p. 879 18. said, est perseverantia in peccato 
it was forbidden to mention the names usque ad mortem (Conc. Tric. τι. § 3). 
of those who had died under excom- This widespread interpretation came 
munication on the ground of this pas- from the ambiguity of the Latin prepo- 
sage. Peccatum enim ad mortem, it sition. See Bede above. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 215 


ζωὴν ἔχειν ἐν ἑαυτῷ, as the Father hath life in Himself, even so gave 
He to the Son also to have life in Himself. Compare John vi. 57 ζῶ διὰ 
τὸν πατέρα, and Apoc. i. 17. But men have not ‘life in themselves,’ either 
originally or by divine gift. Their life is a life of necessary, continuous, 
essential dependence (ἐν Χριστῷ ‘in Christ,’ according to St Paul’s phrase). 
This must remain so to the end. Even when they participate in the virtue 
of Christ’s humanity, they have life through Him and not in themselves : 
John vi. 57 (ὁ τρώγων), xiv. 19. 


li. Zhe Nature of Life. 
Three terms are used by St John to describe ‘life’ under different Terms for 


aspects : ‘life’ and 
(I) ζωή (the life), ‘life which is truly life’: o. iii. 14 note. a 


(2) ζωὴ αἰώνιος, ‘ eternal life’ (not in Apoc.): 6. i. 2 note. 


For the shade of difference between ζωή and ζωὴ αἰώνιος see John iii. 36 
(1 John iii. 14 f.; John v. 24). 

(3) ἡ αἰώνιος ζωή (John xvi. 3; comp. Acts xiii. 46; 1 Tim. vi. 12); 
ἡ ζωὴ ἡ αἰώνιος (I John i. 2, ii. 25), ‘the eternal life’: 6. i. 2 note. 


In connexion with those terms the following verbal phrases must also 
be noticed : 


(1) Gy to live: John v. 25, vi. 57, xi. 25, xiv. 19; 1 John iv. 9 (ρου. 
xx. 5). Comp. 1 Pet. iv. 6; 1 Thess. v. 10; 2 Cor, xiii. 4; Rom. viii. 13; 
Hebr. xii. 9. 

(2) nv els τὸν αἰῶνα, ‘to live for ever’: John vi. 51, 58. Comp. Apoc. 
iv. 9, 10, xv. 7 ὁ ζῶν εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων (peculiar to St John in N.T.). 

(3) ἔχειν ζωήν, ‘to have life’: John x. 10, xx. 31; 1 John v. 12 (τὴν ¢) 
(peculiar to St John in N. T.). 

(4) ἔχειν ζωὴν αἰώνιον, ‘to have eternal life’: John iii. 15 ἢ, 36, v. 24, 
vi. 40, 47, 54; I John v. 13 (iii. 15). Comp. Matt. xix. 16. 


In considering these phrases it is necessary to premise that in spiritual Eternal 
things we must guard against all conclusions which rest upon the notions of essentially 
succession and duration. ‘Eternal life’ is that which St Paul speaks of as erodes 

P Ae ὡς Sep ἢ : : ἕ ~ time. 
ἡ ὄντως ζωή, ‘the life which is life indeed’ (1 Tim. vi. 19), and ἡ ζωὴ τοῦ 
θεοῦ, ‘the life of God’ (Eph. iv. 18). It is not an endless duration of being 
in time, but being of which time is not a measure. We have indeed no 
powers to grasp the idea except through forms and images of sense. These 
must be used ; but we must not transfer them as realities to another order. 

Life for a finite creature is union with God (comp. Col. i. 16, 17 ἐν αὐτῷ Life lies 
ἐκτίσθη τὰ πάντα...τὰ πάντα ἐν αὐτῷ συνέστηκεν ; Acts xvii. 28 ἐν αὐτῷ ζῶμεν), in know- 
Such union is for a rational being involved in a real and progressive know- ieee of, 

: 7 Ἐπὶ - at is 
ledge of God in Christ. For spiritual knowledge is not external but fellowship . 
sympathetic; and necessarily carries with it growing conformity to God. with, God. 
Hence ‘the eternal life” which Christ is and gave, is described as lying in the 
continuous effort to gain a fuller knowledge of God and Christ (John xvii. 3 
ἵνα γινώσκωσιν); or, as the apostle writes out the Lord’s words more fully: 
‘the Son of God hath come and hath given us understanding that we may 


216 


Universal 
life. 


Individual 
life. 


The two 
lives one. 


Creation. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


‘know (iva γινώσκωμεν) Him that is true; and we are in Him that ἐδ true, 
‘tn His Son Jesus Christ’ (τ John y. 20). So it is that Christ’s words are 
‘words of life’ (John vi. 68; comp. vi- 63; viii. 51; xii. 50; James i. 18; 
Acts v. 20 is different). Real knowledge rests on fellowship and issues in 
fellowship. 

Under this aspect all being is a revelation of life to man (John i. 4). 
which may become intelligible to him. The thought is one which is 
especially needed in an age of scientific analysis. We are tempted on all 
sides to substitute the mechanism, or the part, for the whole: the physical 
conditions or accompaniments for the vital force. The life is not in us only 
but in the world. 

Under another aspect it can be said that the Gospel is ‘the revelation 
of life,” and that in the Incarnation ‘the life was made manifest.’ By 
the personal coming of the Word in flesh the worth of individual life is 
shewn. He who ‘lives’ is conscious of power and office, and so far as he 
lives uses his power and fulfils his office. 

This view of life corresponds with and completes the former. All power 
is finally the gift of God: all office is for the accomplishment of His will. 
Life therefore is the use of the gifts of God according to the will of God. 
Or, to combine both notions, we are brought back to the original idea: life 
is fellowship with God, which includes fellowship with man, and this 
fellowship is realised in Christ. 


iii. Christ the Life. 


Christ is ‘the life’ and that both in regard to the individual (John xi. 25 
ἐγώ εἰμι ἡ ἀνάστασις καὶ ἡ ζωή Jam the Resurrection and the Life) and in 
regard to the whole sum of being (John xiv. 6 ἐγώ εἰμι ἡ ὁδὸς καὶ ἡ ἀλήθεια 
καὶ ἡ ζωή, Tam the Way and the Truth and the Life). Even before His 
Coming in flesh, the Creation which He sustained by His presence was a 
divine revelation (John i. 4); and by His Coming ‘the life was manifested ’ 
and men recognised it (1 John i. 2). 

He came that men may have life and the fulness of all that life needs 
(John x. 10 ζωὴν περισσὸν ἔχειν). The life which He gives is not and 
cannot be separated from Himself. Therefore, as things are, His Coming 
was crowned by His Passion and Exaltation (John iii. 15), whereby His 
Life was made available for others through Death (John xii. 32 (24)). 

His offer of Life is universal (John vi. 51 ὁ ἄρτος ὃν ἐγὼ δώσω ἡ σάρξ μου 
ἐστὶν ὑπὲρ τῆς τοῦ κόσμου ζωῆς, the bread which I will give is my flesh for 
the life of the world). And the offer is made of the pure love of God (John 
iii. 16; 1 John iy. 10). The new creation is a work of spontaneous divine 
love even as the first creation, while it answered, necessarily answered, to 
the fulfilment of the divine idea (John i, 17 ἐγένετο). 

In one sense the gift of life is made and complete (1 John v. 11 ¢ ai. 
ἔδωκεν ἡμῖν) ; but under another aspect it is still offered, promised, given 
(John x. 28 δίδωμι αὐτοῖς ¢. al.; xvii. 2 ἵνα.. «δώσει ¢. at.; 1 John ii. 25 ἐπαγ- 
γελία). The spiritually sick, if living in one sense, require ‘life’ (1 John τ. 
16 δώσει αὐτῷ ζωήν, τοῖς ἁμαρτάνουσιν μὴ πρὸς θάνατον : comp. John iy. 50). 
Comp. ὃ ν. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 217 


iv. The Life of the Believer. 

The universal gift of life offered by Christ has to be personally appropri- The life , 

ated (Johu vi. 35, 50 ἢ, 58). In this process it comes through Christ, as the of the 
agent (1 John iv. 9 ἵνα ζήσωμεν δι᾿ αὐτοῦ, V. per ewm: comp. John vy. 40); ἐν he 
and it comes for the sake of Christ, as the ground of quickening (John vi. 57 possession 
ζήσει δι ἐμέ, V. propter me), because He is what He is (1 John ii. 12). of the Liv- 
In other words the life of the believer follows from the life of Christ 7g Son. 
(John xiv. 19 ὅτι ἐγὼ ζῶ καὶ ὑμεῖς ζήσεσθε, where the future is used in 
regard to the completer fulness of Christ’s working ; comp. 2 Cor. iv. Io f.; 
Col. iii. 4; Eph. ii. 5), and is realised in (that is, by union with) Him 
(John iii. 15; 1 John v. 11: comp. Rom. vi. 23; 2 Tim. i. 1), as He has 
been made known (John xx. 31 ¢ éy. ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ). For the life is 
in the Living Son (1 John v. 11) and not in the letter of the Law (John v. 
39); so that the possession of the Son is the possession of life (1 John v. 12, 
comp. Rom. v. 10 κατηλλάγημεν...διὰ τοῦ θανάτου... σωθησόμεθα ἐν τῇ ξωῇ 
αὐτοῦ). And he who is one with Christ is one with God (John xvii. 21 ἵνα 
ἐν ἡμῖν dow: comp. 1 John ii. 24 f.; John vi. 56 f.). 

For the believer the transition from death to life has been made In the 
(John v. 24; 1 John iii. 14 μεταβεβήκαμεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτου eis τὴν ζωήν : Tealisation 
comp. 1 John v. 12). But the consequences of the transition are realised, ve 
as the transition itself is conditioned, by the activity of faith (John iii. 16, 36, unites 
vi. 47, XX. 31; 1 John v. 13 [ὁ πιστεύων, of πιστεύοντες]; John vi. 40 ὁ with God 
θεωρῶν καὶ πιστεύων). So man in a true sense works with God; and in by faith. 
John i. 12 the human and divine elements in the beginning, the growth 
and the issue of life are set side by side in a striking parallelism (ἐγεν- 
νήθησαν, ἐξουσίαν, τέκνα---ἔλαβον, πιστεύουσιν, γενέσθαι). By this energy of 
faith the believer finds union with Christ’s humanity (John vi. 51, 54, 58: 
comp. Vi. 35, 56, 58, x. 10). 


v. Life present and future. 

The life which lies in fellowship with God in Christ is, as has been pternal 

seen already, spoken of as ‘eternal’ life in order to distinguish it from the life, 
life of sense and time under which true human existence is veiled at 
present. Such a life of phenomena may be ‘death’ (1 John iii. 14: comp. 
v. 16). But ‘eternal life’ is beyond the limitations of time: it belongs to 
the being of God (1 John i. 2 ἦν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα), and finds its con- 
summation in the transforming vision of the Son seen as He is (1 John iii. 2; 
John xiv. 23, 2f.). For us now therefore it is spoken of as both present 
and future. 

1. The ‘life eternal’ is essentially present, so far as it is the potential present 
fulfilment of the idea of humanity (John iii. 36, v. 24, vi. 47, 54, XX. 31; and 


1 In all these places the force of the Acts iv. 32, xi. 21, xix. 2; 2 Thess. 
present participle is conspicuous. St i. τὸ, ii 12; Eph. i. 13; Hebr. iv. 3; 
John uses the aor. partic. once only: Jude 5; and again with the perfect: 
John xx. 29. The force of the present Acts xv. 5, xvi. 34; [xvili. 27, xix. 
can beseen by contrast with theaorist: 18;] xxi. 20, 25; Tit. iii. 8. 

(Mark] xvi. 16f.; Lukei. 45, viii. 12; 


218 


future. 


‘The true 
God’ an- 
swers to 
the words 
‘God is 
love.’ 


‘Person- 
ality’ as 
applied to 
God. 


Love in- 
volves a 
‘ tri-per- 
sonality.’ 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


1 John ν. 12); and the possession of life may become a matter of actual 
knowledge (1 John v. 13: comp. 1 John iii. 15). 

This thought of the present reality of ‘eternal life’ is characteristic of 
St John, and in its full development is peculiar to him (but comp. Gal. ii. 20). 


2, At the same time the life is regarded as future in its complete 
realisation, so far as itis the fulfilment of Messianic promises (John iv. 14, 36, 
vi. 27, xii. 25, νυ 25, Vi. 57, XL 255 xiv. 19, vi. 54: compare 1 John ii. 25, 
iii. 2; and also Mark x. 30; Gal. vi. 8). 

Hence it is intelligible how ‘eternal life’ is spoken of as ‘the com- 
mandment’ of the Father (John xii. 50); and again as the progressive 
knowledge of the Father in the Son (1 John v. 20). For the command- 
ment of God is represented to us in the work of Caner and to embrace 
this in faithful obedience is to ‘have life in His name’ (John xx. 31), on 
which we believe (1 John v. 13) with growing intelligence. 

If now we endeavour to bring together the different traits of ‘the 
eternal life’? we see that it is a life which with all its fulness and all its 
potencies is now: a life which extends beyond the limits of the individual, 
and preserves, completes, crowns individuality by placing the part in con- 
nexion with the whole: a life which satisfies while it quickens aspiration: 
a life which is seen, as we regard it patiently, to be capable of conquering, 
reconciling, uniting the rebellious, discordant, broken elements of being on 
which we look and which we bear about with us: a life which gives unity 
to the constituent parts and to the complex whole, which brings together 
heaven and earth, which offers the sum of existence in one thought. As 
we reach forth to grasp it, the revelation of God is seen to have been 
unfolded in its parts in Creation; and the parts are seen to have been 
brought together again by the Incarnation. 


Additional Note (2) on v. 20. ‘ The true God’ 


When St John speaks of God as ‘He that is true’ (ὁ ἀληθινός), He who 
alone (John xvii. 3 ὁ μόνος ἀληθινὸς θεός) and absolutely fulfils the idea 
of God which man is constituted to form, and then in significant and 
mysterious words identifies union with ‘Him that is true, with union ‘with 
His Son Jesus Christ, he explains in the terms of historical revelation that 
which is involved in the statement ‘God is love’ He indicates in what 
way the ‘personality’ of God is to be held and guarded from false con- 
clusions. St John, as all the biblical writers, everywhere uses language of 
God which assigns to Him ‘action’ and ‘will’ But, as far as our human 
observation reaches, ‘will’ implies resistance, and ‘action’ implies suc- 
cession. Such limitations can find no place in the idea of God. The con- 
ception of ‘personality’ which we can form therefore expresses only a 
fragment of the truth, that side of it which assures us of the possibility of 
approach to God on our part as to One Who loves and may be loved. 

But we cannot rest here. When we endeavour to think of God Himself 
we are necessarily led to inquire whether Scripture does not help us to 
rise to a thought in which we can see represented from the divine side 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 219 


that which is in the Divine Being the analogue of sole-personality in a finite 
being. This thought we find in the words ‘God is love” The phrase, as we 
have seen, describes the essence and not an attribute of God. It presents 
to us, as far as we can apprehend the truth, something of God in Himself. 
It must hold good of God in His innermost Being, if we may so speak, 
apart from creation. Now love involves a subject and an object, and that 
which unites both. We are taught then to conceive of God as having in 
Himself the perfect object of love and the perfect response of love, com- 
pletely self-sufficing and self-complete. We thus gain, however imperfect 
language may be, the idea of a tri-personality in an Infinite Being as cor- 
relative to a sole-personality in a finite being. In the Unity of Him Who 
is One we acknowledge the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, in the 
interaction of Whom we can see love fulfilled. 

The language in John i. 1, where we have opened a unique view of the This fact 
Divine Being without any regard to a revelation to man, indicates the indicated 
same thought. The relation of ‘the Word’ to ‘God’ is described as a ae 
relation of active love: ὁ λόγος ἦν πρὸς τὸν θεόν, the personal energy of words of 
the Word was directed towards, and (so to speak) regulated by ‘God,’ the Gos- 
while the Word Himself ‘was God? In the Epistle the thought is pre- Pel, and 
sented differently. There it is ‘the Life’ and not ‘the Word’ which is 5 he 

: Ε Bone og ner pistle, 
spoken of. The conception of ‘the Life’ is wider in its range than that of 
‘the Word, though it is through ‘the Word’ that ‘the Life’ is revealed. 
This life is ‘the life eternal.” It is not of this temporal order though it is 
made known in it, under its limitations. It is a life which essentially finds 
its original in the Godhead: ἦν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα, it was realised in the 
intercommunion of the Divine Persons, when time was not. Thus we have 
in this twofold revelation of an activity of ‘the Word’ towards ‘God,’ of a 
fulfilment of ‘Life’ towards ‘the Father,’ beyond time, such a vision as we 
can look upon of the fulness of the Being of God in Himself. And when 
‘the Word’ and ‘the Life’ are brought within the sphere of human 
existence, this action is characteristically described : ‘the Life was mani- 
fested’: ‘the Word became flesh.’ 

Nothing is said in either passage directly of the Holy Spirit. But His 
action is involved in the phrase ἦν πρός in such a connexion. He is, so to 
seek a definite expression for the idea, the Mediating Power through Whom 
the love that goes forth is perfectly united with the love that answers. 

He gives unity to the Life, which we can only conceive of in fragments. 

It will be evident that this view of the nature of God prepares the way This tri- 
for revelation. The Word, Who is God (θεός and not ὁ θεός as in Sabellian person- 
teaching), has a personal Being and can make the Father known (1 John ii. re Sa 
22 ff.). The Spirit, Who is God, has a personal Being, and can make the ¢o, a 
Son known (John xiv. 26, xvi. 14). At the same time, while this fulness of lation. 
life fulfilled in God Himself is disclosed to us, the divine unity is main- 
tained as essential and not numerical. The Word and the Spirit are both 
spoken of in personal relations to ‘God’ (John i. 1; 32f). That is when 
the Persons in the Godhead are recognised, the unity of God is simul- 
taneously affirmed. 

Such glimpses are opened to us of the absolute tri-personality of God as Elsewhere 


220 THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


St John preparatory to the account of the historical Gospel by St John, but clse- 

speaks of where, like the other apostolic writers, he deals with the Trinity revealed 

‘the Eco- in the work of Redemption (‘the Economic Trinity’). The Father is spoken 

nomic . 

Trinity of in His relation to the Incarnate Son, and through Him to men. The 
Son is spoken of as manifested to men through the Incarnation in the 
union of the two natures (yet comp. John ν. 26). The Holy Spirit is spoken 
of as ‘proceeding’ on His Mission to the Church (John xv. 26 note), sent 
by the Father and by the Son; and taking of that which is the Son’s to 
declare to men (John xiv. 26, xv. 26, xvi. 14; 1 John ii. 20 ἢ, 27). The 
truths are stated side by side in connexion with our creation, redemption, 
sanctification; and we are enabled to see that they answer in some way, 
which we have no power to determine adequately, to the very Being of 
God as He is in Himself. 

Twoerrors The maintenance of the supreme Sovereignty of One God (μοναρχία) in 

ee ἃ: this tri-personality has to be guarded against a twofold tendency to error : 

Avian, and (1) towards a distinction in essence between God and Christ (the Father 

Sabellian. and the Son); and (2) towards a confusion of the Persons of the Father 
and the Son and the Spirit. The first error found its typical expression 
in Arianism: the second in Sabellianism. The first has affinities with 
Polytheism by introducing the idea of a subordinate Divinity. The second 
has affinities with Pantheism, as seeing in things transitory manifestations 
of the Person of God. Both rest upon a false Neo-Judaic conception of 
Monotheism. 

The authority of St John has been brought forward in support of each 
of these views: for the first John xiv. 28 (see note, and Compare Athanas. 
de Syn. § 28); and for the second John x. 30 (see note, and compare 

The Tertull. adv. Prax. cc. xx. xxii). It must however be noticed that the 

ena of preat Greek Fathers understood the first passage of the Personal Subor- 

ordination ination of the Son as Son to the Father in the one equal and absolute 
of the Son Godhead. And this view, which has been obscured in the West by the 
in Person teaching of Augustine, is of the highest importance; for it leads to the 
ie apprehension of the fitness of the mediatorial and consummative work of 
“the Son. The assumption of humanity and the laying aside of the divine 
conditions of existence by the Son are everywhere spoken of by St John as 
voluntary acts. They correspond therefore to the Being of the Son as 
Son, for we cannot conceive of the Father or of the Spirit as Incarnate. 
In other words the unchanged and unchangeable ‘ I’ of the Word, the Son, 
includes either the potentiality or the fact of the Incarnation, the union 

with the finite. 


ΤΩΑΝΟΥ B 


ΤΩΑΝΟΥ B 


O MPECBYTEPOC EKAEKTH Kupia καὶ Tots TEK- 


The structure of the letter is simple 
and natural. It consists of (1) the 
salutation (1I—3); (2) the counsel and 
warning (4—11); (3) the conclusion 
(12, 13). Whatever may be the 
interpretation of the individual ad- 
dress in ov. 5, 13, the main part of 
the letter is addressed to more read- 
ers than one (v. 6 ἠκούσατε, περιπατῆτε, 
Ὁ. ὃ βλέπετε ἑαυτούς, Ὁ. 10 πρὸς ὑμᾶς, 
©. 12 ὑμῖν, πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ἡ χαρὰ ὑμῶν). 


1. The Salutation (1--3). 

The salutation is framed on the usual 
type: ὁ πρεσβύτερος ἐκλεκτῇ Kupia... 
...xapis ἔλεος εἰρήνη παρὰ θεοῦ πατρός, 
καὶ παρὰ Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ... Βυὺ this out- 
line is filled up by successive amplifi- 
cations as the apostle dwells on each 
word which he writes in relation to 
the circumstances of the case. In 
this respect the Salutation may be 
compared with that in the Epistle to 
the Galatians, where in like manner 
St Paul expands his usual formula in 
view of the peculiar condition of the 
Churches which he is addressing. 

«The Elder to one who is an elect 
lady and her children, whom I love 
in truth; and not I only but also all 
they that know the truth; 2for the 
truth’s sake which abideth in us—and 
it shall be with us for ever: 3grace, 
mercy, peace, shall be with us from 
God the Futher, and from Jesus 


Christ the Son of the Father, in truth 
and love. 

I. 6 mpeoBurepos] Senior V. The 
eldér. The definite form of the title 
marks the writer as completely iden- 
tified by it. In this connexion there 
can be little doubt that it describes 
not age simply but official position. 
The writer was recognised by the 
receiver of the Epistle as ‘the Elder.’ 

The title ‘elder’ appears to have 
had special currency in the Asiatic 
Churches, where it was used of a 
particular class (Papias ap. Euseb. 
Af. E. iii. f.; Iren. v. 33. 3; 36. 2); 
yet not without a recognition of the 
Apostles as ‘the elders’ in point of 
time (Papias, ἰ, ¢.). It is easy to see 
why St John would choose such a title, 
which, while it described official posi- 
tion, suggested also a fatherly relation, 
and perhaps even pointed to inter- 
course with Christ (1 Pet. v. 1). For 
the history of the word πρεσβύτερος 
see Lightfoot, Philippians, pp. 228 f. 

ἐκλεκτῇ xupia] elect domine V. 
The rendering of the phrase is beset 
by the greatest difficulties. No in- 
terpretation can be accepted as satis- 
factory. 

The difficulty seems to have been 
felt from'a very early time. Two dis- 
tinct views have found support, that 
the title describes a person, and that 
it describes a society. 


224 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. {1 


2 ~ oN ? Δ - > > , ‘ ᾽ 2 \ 
νοις αὐτῆς, οὖς ἐγὼ ayaTw ἐν ἀληθείᾳ, καὶ οὐκ ἔγω 


1 καὶ οὐκ ἐγώ NB vg me the syrhl: οὐκ ἐγὼ δέ A. 


The first view has been held in 
several different forms. The Latin 
fragments of the Hypotyposes ot 
Clement of Alexandria represent the 
letter as written ‘to a certain Baby- 
lonian (comp. 1 Pet. v. 13) Electa by 
name’ (ad quandam Babyloniam E- 
lectam nomine); ‘it signifies how- 
ever’ (that is, this proper name, 
Electa), Clement adds, ‘the election 
of the holy Church.’ 

Others again (so the [late] Syrian 
version) have regarded Kupia as ἃ 
proper name (‘to the elect Kyria’). 
Such a name is found (see Liicke, 
444n.); but if Kupia were so used here 
it is in the highest degree unlikely 
that St John would have written ék- 
λεκτῇ Kupia, and not Kupia τῇ ἐκλεκτῇ 
as Ὁ. 13; 3 John 1; Rom. xvi. 13. 

It has also been supposed that the 
two words form a compound proper 
name (‘to Electa Kyria’). This view 
removes the difficulty of the con- 
struction; but the combination is at 
least very strange. 

On the other hand it is not easy to 
suppose that the letter was addressed 
to an unnamed person, a single Chris- 
tian ‘lady’ (‘To an elect lady, so 
Vulg.); though this is the most 
natural rendering of the text (comp. 
1 Pet. 1. 1). 

All these notions of a personal 
address moreover are unsupported 
by such allusions in the letter as 
might be expected to mark an indi- 
vidual relationship. 

Feeling these difficulties many from 
the time of Jerome (Zp, exxiii. (xi.) 
ὃ 12 ad Ageruchiam) have taken the 
title, the ‘elect lady,’ to be applied 
to some particular Christian society 
(Schol. ap. Matt. ἐκλεκτὴν Kupiav λέγει 
τὴν ἐν τινὶ τόπῳ ἐκκλησίαν ὡς τὴν τοῦ 
Κυρίου διδασκαλίαν ἀκριβῆ φυλάττου- 
σαν...) or even to the whole Church: 
‘to her who is a chosen Lady, a 


Bride of Him who is the Lord.’ But 
of such a use of Kupia no example is 
quoted. 

On the whole it is best to recog- 
nise that the problem of the address 
is insoluble with our present know- 
ledge. It is not unlikely that it con- 
tains some allusion, intelligible under 
the original circumstances, to which 
we have lost the key. But the gene- 
ral tenour of the letter favours the 
opinion that it was sent to a com- 
munity and not to one believer. 

τοῖς τέκνοις αὐ. natis etus V., her 
children. The phrase can be under- 
stood either literally, 1 Tim. iii. 4; 
or spiritually, 1 Tim. i. 2; Gal. iv. 25. 
Comp. Apoc. ii.23. The context here 
aud the use of the term in vv. 4, 13 
(comp. 3 John 4) favour the spiri- 
tual sense. It has been suggested 
that the ‘children’ may have been 
orphans or the like committed to the 
“lady’s’ care, some of whom had gone 
out into the world while others were 
still with her. 

οὗς ἐγὼ ay.] whom, mother alike 
and children, Z lore. It seems better 
to take this comprehensive sense than 
to refer the relative to the children 
only. 

The emphasis which is laid upon 
the apostle’s feeling (ἐγὼ dy.) points 
to some unknown facts (compare 3 
John 5). Both the shorter letters 
imply the existence of divisions in the 
societies to which they were directed; 
and St John brings his authority to 
bear against those from whom the per- 
sons addressed may have suffered. 

ἐν ἀληθείᾳ] in truth, that is with 
a feeling which rightly deserves the 
ae see John xvii. 19 note; Col. 
i. 

καὶ οὐκ ἐγὼ pdvos...]and not Ialone 
(solus V.), a single person, but also 
all that have come to know the truth. 
The love is directed to a character. 


2, 3] 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


225 


La ? 7 ‘ ‘ \ 
μόνος ἀλλὰ καὶ TavTES οἱ ἐγνωκότες τὴν ἀλήθειαν, "διὰ 


\ ? , \ ἰὴ 2 eon \ ᾽ς in at 
τὴν ἀλήθειαν τὴν μένουσαν ἐν ἡμῖν, και μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν ἔσται 


2 Ἅ, 3. ὧκ at " ἃ - t af ? κα \ 
εἰς TOV αἰωνα᾿ δεσται μεθ μων χάρις ἔλεος εἰρήνη παρα 


2 μένουσαν : ἐνοικοῦσαν A. 
θ.: ἀπὸ θ. N*, 


Wherever the character exists, the 
love exists. This is made clear by the 
words which follow. The love felt by 
St John and by those whom he de- 
scribes is felt ‘for the truth’s sake...’ 

μόνος] Luke xxiv. 18; Hebr. ix. 7. 
Contrast 2 Tim. iv. 8 ov μόνον ἐμοί 
(1 John ii. 2); Rom. iii. 29. 

ἐγνωκότες] 1 John ii. 3 note. John 
viii. 32. Contrast 1 John ii. 21 οὐκ 
οἴδατε τὴν GA. 

τὴν ἀλ.] the truth, which is identical 
with Christ’s message (John i. 17), 
and with Christ’s Person (John xiv. 7). 
Comp. 1 John i. 6, 8, notes. 

2. The common acknowledgment 
of the eternal Truth is the certain 
foundation of love. 

διὰ τὴν dA.] The words recal ἐν ἀλ. 
The Truth makes true love possible. 
This Truth is not said to abide ‘in 
you’ or ‘in them,’ but ‘in us’ The 
apostle at once identifies himself with 
the whole society of the faithful. 
Compare Ὁ. 5 ἵνα ἀγαπῶμεν. 1 Johni. 
4 (ἡμῶνλ 

τὴν μένουσαν ἐν ἡ. See 1 John iii. 15 
note. 

καὶ μεθ᾽ ἡ. ἔσται] and with us it 
shall be. The position of μεθ᾽ ἡ. em- 
phasises the peculiar privileges of 
those whom St John identifies with 
himself. The change of construction 
from the participle to the finite verb 
(uévoveay...€orar) answers to a pause 
during which the writer contemplates 
the fact which he has affirmed, and 
then solemnly confirms the fulness of 
his faith in it. Compare 1 John iii. 
I καὶ ἐσμέν, i, 2 note. 

pe? ἡμῶν] with us and not only 
in us. The Truth itself has through 
Christ a personal power. Comp. 1 
John iv. 17. The different relations 


W. J. 


3 ἔσ. μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν (ὑμῶν me): om. A. 


Tapa 


of the Paraclete to believers are de- 
scribed in John xiv. 16 f. by pera, 
παρά, ἐν. 

εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα] See 1 John ii. 17 note. 

3. ἔσται ped ἡμῶν... There shall 
be with us... This unique form of 
salutation seems to have been deter- 
mined by the preceding clause (μεθ᾽ 
ἡμῶν ἔσται): ‘with us truth shall be 
...yes, there shall be with us...’ The 
wish passes into assurance. In the 
Epistles of St Paul no verb is express- 
ed in the salutation (e.g. 1 Thess. i. 
I, χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη. In 1, 2 
Peter, Jude πληθυνθείη is added (1 
Pet. i. 1 χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη πληθ.). 

μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν] Ὁ. 2. The readers are 
identified with the writer. 

xap. ἔλ. eip.] The succession ‘grace, 
mercy, peace’ marks the order from 
the first motion of God to the final 
satisfaction of man. ‘Mercy’ defives 
as it were the manifestation of the 
divine ‘grace’ and prepares for the 
restoration of ‘peace’ to man’s disor- 
dered life. 

The same combination occurs in 
salutations in 1 Tim. i. 2; 2 Tim. i. 2 
(Ign. ad Smyrn. 12). Χάρις καὶ εἰρήνη 
is found in Apoce. i. 4; 1 Pet. i. 2; 
2 Pet. i. 2, and in all the other 
Epistles of St Paul. In St Jude 2 
the salutation is ἔλεος καὶ εἰρήνη καὶ 
ἀγάπη. (Comp. Aart. Pol. Inscr.) 

χάρις Greos...] The word χάρις oc- 
curs elsewhere in St John only in 
3 John 4; John i. 14, 16, 17; Apoc. 
i. 4; xxii. 21; and the absence of the 
cognate forms(yapiCopat, χάρισμα) τοι 
his writings is worthy of notice. Ἔλεος 
is not found elsewhere in his writings 
nor yet ἐλεεῖν. 

In regard to the divine action 
‘grace’ points to the absolute free- 


15 


226 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. [3 


΄- ἢ ΄- - rat ~ ~ 
θεοῦ πατρός, καὶ παρὰ ‘Inco’ Χριστοῦ τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ 
δ A / 
πατρός, ἐν ἀληθείᾳ καὶ ἀγάπη. 


om. παρά (2°) N*. 
πο: -ἰ αὐτοῦ' τοῦ π. &*. 


dom of God’s love in relation to man’s 
helplessness to win it; and ‘mercy’ to 
His tenderness towards man’s misery. 

εἰρήνη] John xiv. 27; xvi. 33; XX. 
19, 21, 26. The peace which is the 
gift of ‘the God of peace’ (1 Thess. v. 
23; Rom. xv. 33; xvi. 20; Phil. iv. 9; 
Heb. xiii. 20) answers to all the dis- 
harmonies of being in man himself, in 
his relation to his fellow-men and to 
God, and in creation generally. Com- 
pare especially Rom. viii. 6; Eph. ii. 
14 ff 

mapd...mapa...] The repetition of 
the preposition in such a form is 
unique. It serves to bring out dis- 
tinctly the twofold personal relation 
of man to the Father and to the Son. 
Elsewhere in parallel cases the pre- 
position used is always ἀπό: eg. Rom. 
i. 7; 1 Cor. 1, 3, &c. Comp. 2 Tim. 
i. 18. 

θεοῦ πατρός] God the Father: more 
commonly God our Father (6. π. 
ἡμῶν), @g. Rom. i. 7; 1 Cor. i. 3 &e. 
Comp. 1 Tim. i. 2; 2 Tim. i. 2; Tit. i. 
4; Eph. vi. 23; Col. iii. 17. Special 
stress is laid upon the revelation of 
God in this absolute character. Comp. 
δ. 9. 

Ἶ. Xp. τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ z.] The phrase 
is unique. It seems to have been 
chosen to connect the revelation of 
the Father as definitely as possible 
with the Son. Comp. 1 John ii, 22 f.; 
and 1 John i. 3; Col. i. 13. 

It may be noticed that the title 
‘Lord’ (κυρίου *I.), which is added by 
some early authorities, is not found 
in the Epistles of St John, though it 
occurs in every other book of the N.T. 
except the Epistle to Titus. 

ἐν ad. καὶ ἀγ.) The threefold divine 
gift is realised perfectly both in regard 
to thought and in regard to action. 
Truth and love describe an intellec- 


Ἰησοῦ AB vg the: +xupiov’ I. ς΄ δὲ me syr hl. 


τοῦ 


tual harmony and a moral harmony ; 
and the two correspond with each 
other according to their subject- 
matter. Love is truth in human action ; 
and truth is love in regard to the 
order of things. 

The combination is not found else- 
where. 


2. Counsel and warning (4—11). 


The rise of false teachers, who seem 
to have affected superior knowledge 
(v% 9 προάγων), and neglected moral 
duties (comp. 1 John ii. 4), leads St 
John to emphasise the duty of active 
love, which is the sum of the divine 
commandments (4—7); and then to 
insist upon the necessity of guarding 
inviolate ‘the teaching of Christ, the 
historic Gospel which conveys the re- 
velation of ‘the Father and the Son’ 

8—11). 

Pi Past faithfulness is made the 
foundation for the apostle’s counsel 
(Ὁ. 4). He enjoins practical love be- 
cause deceivers have arisen who by 
denying the coming of Jesus Christ 
in flesh deprive earthly life of its 
divine significance (5—7). 

41 rejoice greatly that I have 
found of thy children walking in 
truth, even as we received commana- 
ment from the Father. s And now 
7 pray thee, Lady, not as writing 
a new commandment to thee, but 
that which we had from the begin- 
ning, that we love one another. © And 
this is love, that we should walk ac- 
cording to His commandments. This 
ts the commandment even as ye heard 
Jrom the beginning, that ye should 
walk in tt (love). 7 Because many 
deceivers are gone out (went out) into 
the world, even they that confess not 
Jesus Christ coming in flesh: this is 
the deceiver and the antichrist. 


4, 5] THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 227 

ΦΕχαρην λίαν ὅτι εὕρηκα ἐκ τῶν τέκνων σου περι- 
πατοῦντας ἐν ἀληθείᾳ, καθὼς ἐντολὴν ἐλάβομεν παρὰ 
τοῦ πατρός. Skal νῦν ἐρωτῶ σε, κυρία, οὐχ ὡς ἐντολὴν 


, \ \ ἃ PY ’ ᾽ ea « 
γράφων σοι καινὴν ἀλλὰ ἣν εἴχαμεν ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς, ἵνα 


4 ἐλάβομεν : ἔλαβον &. 
(+an old commandment syr hl). 


4. Ἐχάρην.. ὅτι εὕρηκα] I rejoiced 
. that I have found... The joy is 
referred to its initial moment: the 
ground of it still continues. 

For the precedence given to the 
expression of joy compare St Paul’s 
thanksgivings: 1 Thess. i.2; 2 Thess. 
i. 3; 1 Cor. i 4; Rom. i. 8; Phil. 1. 
3f.; Eph. 1. 16; Col. i. 3; Philem. 4. 

εὕρηκα] Comp. 3 John 3; and John 
i. 44, note. 

ἐκ τῶν τ. 0.) V. de filiis tuis. Some 
of thy children. For ἐκ see John xvi. 
17. 
The words appear to refer to an 
experience of the writer in some other 
place than that to which the ‘Lady’ 
belonged. 

περιπ. ἐν ἀλ., Kabas...] walking in 
truth even as... The phrase (περιπ. 
ἐν dy. 3 John 3) is not identical with 
walking in the truth (περιπ. ἐν τῇ 
ay. 3 John 4). Comp. John xvii. 17, 
19. It describes the general cha- 
racter of the life as conducted ‘in 
truth, really and in very deed in a 
certain fashion, even after the com- 
mandment of God. 

évr. ἐλάβ.] John x. 18; Acts xvii. 
15; Col. iv. Io. 

παρὰ τοῦ π.] from the Father in 
the Person of Christ. The preposition 
(Ὁ. 3) marks the directness of the 
divine injunction: Apoc. ii. 27. 

5. καὶ νῦν] and now, looking back 
upon that former feeling (v. 4) of joy... 
The words may mark simply a logical 
connexion: 1 John ii. 28. 

ἐρωτῶ] I pray thee, in the exer- 
cise of the full privilege of Christian 
fellowship. Comp. 1 John v. 16, note. 


παρά: ἀπό A. 
5 γράφων σοι καινήν Β the: καινὴν yp. σοι NA vg me. 


τοῦ π. : om. τοῦ Β. 
ἀλλά : - ἐντολήν δὰ 


The request is directly personal and 
not a general exhortation (παρακαλῶ). 
It is remarkable that the words παρα- 
καλεῖν, παράκλησις, do not occur in the 
writings of St John. The singular 
address (σέ) occurs again in Ὁ. 13. 
In the intermediate verses the plural 
is used. 

οὐχ ὡς évt....] not as writing a new 
commandment... The order is signi- 
ficant (evr. γράφων o.x.). The prayer 
is first distinguished from a command 
generally: ‘I pray thee, not as writing 
a command to thee’; and then the 
command is more exactly described, 
which is indeed the substance of the 
prayer. Comp. 1 John ii. 7. 

εἴχαμεν) we had. Contrast 1 John 
ii. 7 ye had. Throughout the apostle 
identifies himself with those to whom 
he is writing, Christian with Chris- 
tians. 

ἵνα dyardpev...] that we love... The 
words seem to depend upon 7 pray 
thee (John xvii. 15), the intervening 
clause being parenthetical. The apo- 
stle includes himself in the object of 
his prayer (that we, not that ye). It 
is possible that the form in which the 
request is thus shaped is occasioned 
by the reference to ‘the command 
which we had, 

éporace...wa...] pray thee...that... 
The infinitive and a final particle are 
both used by St John after épwrav: 
(1) infin. John iv. 40 || Luke v. 3; viii. 
37; Acts iii. 3; x. 48; xvi. 39; xviii. 
20; xxiii. 18; 1 Th. v. 12. (2) ba 
John iv. 47; xix. 31, 38 | Mk. vii. 26; 
Luke vii. 36 (vii. 3; xi. 37 ὅπως); xvi. 
27 (Acts xxiii. 20 ὅπως). 


15—2 


228 THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. [6,7 


΄ t A ef ᾽ \ © 2 , of 
ἀγαπώμεν ἀλλήλους. Skat αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἀγαπή; ἵνα 
Fas A A i: of € ᾽ rd 
περιπατώμεν κατὰ τὰς ἐντολᾶς αὐτοῦ: αὕτη ἡ ἐντολὴ 


5 \ , - ΄, > - 
ἐστιν, καθὼς ἠκούσατε ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς; ἵνα ἐν αὐτῇ περιπα- 


τῆτε. 


© \ , In > ‘ / © 
ὅτι ToAAOL πλανοι ἐξῆλθαν εἰς TOV κόσμον; OL 


6 αὐτοῦ: -- “ἵνα καθώς N* (by the omission of a line of the archetype in 


copying). 


ἡ ἐντ. é. AB (vg) syrhl: ἐ. ἡ ἐντ. SN me the. 


ἡ ἐντ.: - αὐτοῦ δὰ. 


καθώς.. ἵνα ἐν αὐτῇ... Β ΒΥΓὮΠ: ἵνα καθώς. ἵνα ἐν αὐτῇ... δὰ : ἵνα καθώς... ἐν αὐτῇ 


(vg) (me) (the). 


6. The two thoughts of ‘command- 
ment’ and ‘love’ are taken up in the 
inverse order: ‘this is love, ‘this is 
the commandment.’ In treating them 
St John appears to reason in a circle. 
‘Love, he says, ‘is the effort to walk 
according to the divine command- 
ments’; and again, ‘The divine com- 
mandment is that we endeavour to 
walk in love’ The key to this diffi- 
culty lies in the difference between 
‘commandments’ and ‘commandment.’ 
Love strives to realise in detail every 
separate expression of the will of 
God. The summary expression of the 
will of God is that men should walk 
in love, the spirit of sons (1 John 
111. 1). 

καὶ αὕτη é. ἡ ay.] And this is love... 
The description of love is simply 
joined to the request to realise it: 
1 John v. 4, 11. ‘Love’ is left com- 
pletely undefined. Love to God and 
love to man are not finally distin- 
guished. Comp. 1 John iii. 16; iv. 
το, 16—18. 

avrn...wa...| See 1 John v. 3, note. 

περιπ. κατὰ τὰς €. av.] walk accord- 
ing to... Compare Mk. vii. 5 περιπ. 
κατὰ τὴν παράδοσιν...; 2 Cor. x. 2; 
Rom. viii. 4 κατὰ σάρκα (πνεῦμα) reper. ; 
Rom. xiv. 15 κατὰ ἀγάπην περιπ.; 1 
Cor. iii. 3 κατὰ ἄνθρωπον περιπ. Else- 
where the construction is περιπ. ἐν (1 
John i. 6, note). The two construc- 
tions stand side by side 2 Cor. x. 2 f. 

αὕτη ἡ ἐντ. ἐ....} this is the command- 
ment which gathers up in one the 
many commandments. Compare 1 
John iii. 22, 23. The change of order 


περιπατῆτε: περιπατήσητε ©. 


7 ἐξῆλθαν : εἰσῆλθον S. 


from the first clause is significant 
(αὕτη ἐστ. ἡ dy., αὕτη ἡ ἐντ. é.). 

ἠκούσατε...περιπατῆτε...}] Ye heard 
ye walk... The second person is re- 
quired by the definite reference to the 
first teaching of the Church: 1 John 
ii. 7, note. 

ἵνα ἐν αὐτῇ περιπ.] that ye walk in 
it, that is in love, which is the main 
subject of the sentence (comp. Eph. 
vy. 2). No adequate sense is gained by 
supplying in the commandment (in 
eo V., sc. mandato). The complete 
identification of the life of love with 
the fulfilment of all the command- 
ments of God is characteristic of St 
John: 1 John v. 2, 3. 

7. The peril which arises from 
false teachers moves St John to stir 
believers to the active exercise of love 
one with the other. Love so realised 
is a safeguard against error. On the 
other hand the failure to realise the 
Lord’s true humanity in the present 
imperils the love of man for man. 
There is a passage here from ‘love’ to 
‘truth’ (v. 3 ἐν dd. καὶ ἀγ.). 

πλάνοι] seductores V., seducers, de- 
ceivers, who lead to wrong action, 
and not only to wrong opinion. Comp. 
1 John ii. 26 of πλανῶντες. 1 Tim. 
iv. I πνεύμασι πλάνοις. 2 Cor. vi. ὃ ὡς 
πλάνοι; Matt. xxvii. 63. 

ἐξῆλθαν] went out. The tense (1 
John ii. 19) appears to mark a parti- 
cular crisis. They went out from the 
bosom of the Christian society to fulfil 
their work. 

πολλοί... οἱ μὴ ὁμολ.}] The partici- 
pial clause does not only assert a 


8] THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 229 


μὴ ὁμολογοῦντες ᾿Ιησοῦν Χριστὸν “ἐρχόμενον ἐν σαρκί: 
οὗτος ἐστιν ὃ πλάνος καὶ ὁ ἀντίχριστος. 8 Βλέπετε 


ἑαυτούς, ἵνα μὴ ἀπολέσητε ἃ ἠργασάμεθα, ἀλλὰ μισθὸν 


om. ὁ δὲ, 
ἀπολέσητε ἃ εἰργάσασθε ... 
σάμεθα.. ἀπολάβωμεν 5. 


4 ας ὦ 
ο αντίχρ. 3 


definite fact as to these deceivers (οὐχ 
ὁμολογοῦντες), but marks the character 
of the class (comp. 1 John iv. 3): 
‘even they that confess not.’ See Mk. 
Xv. 41 ἄλλαι πολλαὶ αἱ συναναβᾶσαι. 

οἱ μὴ op.) they who confess not... 
The frank and open confession of the 
truth is required. Not to make con- 
fession, even when this does not take 
the form of denial, becomes practically 
identical with it. Comp. John i. 20; 
1 John iv. 2, 3. 

Ἴ. Xp. ἐρχ. ἐν o.] Jesus Christ com- 
ing in flesh. The thought centres 
upon the present perfection of the 
Lord’s Manhood which ἐς still, and is 
to be manifested, and not upon the 
past fact of His coming, 1 John iv. 2 
(ἐληλυθότα): τ John v. 6 (6 ἐλθών). 
Comp. John xiv. 3, note; i. 9 ἦν--- 
ἐρχόμενον. Apoc. xxii. 20, Cfh ἡ 
ὀργὴ ἡ épx. τ Thess. i. 10; Col. iii. 6. 

οὗτός ἐστιν... this is... The general 
description is individualised. He that 
offers this character is the deceiver— 
the typical deceiver—and the anti- 
christ. We might perhaps look for 
other marks: these are decisive. 
Comp. Ὁ. 9; 1 John ii. 22; v. 6, 20. 

ὁ ἀντίχρ.] the antichrist, of whom 
the readers had already heard. 1 John 
ii. 18, note. 

The idea of the ‘deceiver’ is mainly 
relative to men: that of ‘antichrist’ 
to the Lord. 

8,9. The action of false teachers 
imposes upon believers the duty of 
self-examination. The danger which 
they embody is internal as well as ex- 
ternal. There must be a careful watch 
within; and this necessity is shewn to 
be more urgent by the consideration 


8 ἀπολέσητε ἅ ἠργασάμεθα... 
ἀπολάβητε (δὰ) A vg me (syrhl): 
ἀπόλησθε N*. 


ἀπολάβητε B the (syr hl): 
ἀπολέσαμεν ἃ elpya- 


that what seems and claims to be pro- 
gress may be fatal error. 

®Look to yourselves, that ye may 
not lose (destroy) the things which 
we wrought, but may receive a full 
reward. %Ecery one that gocth for- 
ward and abideth not in the teaching 
of Christ hath not God: he that 
abideth in the teaching, the same 
hath both the Father and the Son. 
Tf any one cometh unto you, and 
beareth not this teaching, receive him 
not into your house, and give him no 
greeting; “for he that giveth him 
greeting hath fellowship with his evil 
works. 

8. Βλέπετε éaut.] Videte vosmet ip- 
sos V., Look to yourselves that... Mark 
xiii. g; 1 Cor. xvi. ro. 

ἵνα μὴ aroX....] ne perdatis...V.,that 
ye may not lose (or destroy) what we 
wrought, the manifold results of our 
labours among you, which were as 
talents entrusted to your charge for 
use. 

For the confidence of the apostle 
see 1 John iv. 6; but the word ἠργα- 
σάμεθα appears to refer to the apo- 
stolic teachers generally. 

ἀλλά... ἀπολ.] accipiamusV.,but may 
receive, receive back, from the Great 
Judge... Comp. Luke vi. 34; xv. 27; 
XVi. 25; xxiii. 41; Rom. i. 27; Gal. iv. 
5 (non accipiamus sed recipiamus, 
Aug.). 

μισθ. wr.] mercedem plenam V., a 
Jull reward, in which no one element 
is wanting (Ruth ii. 12, uxx, &c.). 
Comp. Mk. iv. 28 mA. σῖτος; 2 Chron. 


XV. 17 καρδία mA. (adv), For the idea 
of μισθός see Apoc. xi. 18; xxii. 12; 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. [9, 10 


230 


πλήρη ἀπολάβητε. πᾶς ὁ προάγων καὶ μὴ μένων ἐν 
τῇ διδαχῇ τοῦ χριστοῦ θεὸν οὐκ ἔχει. ὁ μένων ἐν 7H 
διδαχῇ, οὗτος καὶ τὸν πατέρα καὶ τὸν υἱὸν ἔχει. το εἰ 
τις ἔρχεται πρὸς ὑμᾶς καὲ ταύτην τὴν διδαχὴν οὐ φέρει, 


δ. ἢ > a7 \ ΄, » σ᾿ \ 
μὴ λαμβάνετε QUTOV εἰς OLKIQAV Kat χαιρειν αυτῷ μῆ 


9 προάγων NAB vg me the: παραβαίνων ς΄. 
copyist looked back three lines in the archetype to προάγων). 
10 τὸν π. καὶ τὸν vi. NB me the syrhl: τὸν vi. καὶ 


“τοῦ χριστοῦ S me. 
τὸν w. Avg. 


John iv. 36; Matt. v. 12 and parallels; 
1 Cor. iii. 8. 

9. πᾶς ὁ προάγων καὶ p. μ.] omnis 
qui preecedit et non m. V., Every one 
that gocth forward and abideth not... 
every one that advances in bold confi- 
dence beyond the limits set to the 
Christian Faith. True progress in- 
cludes the past. These false teachers 
proposed to enter on uew regions of 
truth leaving the old. The two cha- 
racteristics are taken together (ὁ zp. 
kal μὴ μ.). 

μένων ἐν] abideth in...Jobn viii. 31; 
2 Tim. iii. 14. 

ἐν τῇ διδ. τοῦ xp.] in the doctrine of 
Christ, the doctrine which Christ 
brought, and which He brought first 
in His own person, and then through 
His followers (Hebr. ii. 3). This sense 
seems better than the doctrine of 
(concerning) the Christ, and the usage 
of the N.T. is uniformly in favour of 
it: Apoc. ii. 14, 15 ; John xviii. 19; 
Acts ii. 42. Ἡ 66. is used absolutely 
(as below) in Tit. i. 9 (Rom. xvi. 17). 

6. οὐκ ἔχει] hath not God, Whom he 
claims to know more perfectly. Comp. 
1 John ii. 23 (οὐδέ) note. 

ὁ μένων... οὗτος... The pronoun em- 
phasises the definition given. Comp. 
John vi. 46; vii. 18; xv. 5. Faithful 
continuance in ‘the doctrine’ brings a 
living possession of God as He is re- 
vealed in the fulness of His Fatherly 
relation in ‘the Father and the Son.’ 
The change from the abstract title 


μένων (2°): + ‘kal μή᾽ δὰ" (as the 
διδαχῇ : 


‘God’ in the former clause is signi- 
ficant. Comp. 1 John ii. 22 f. 

10, 11. Not only is there danger 
within, but false teaching may come 
from without under a friendly guise. 
The confession of the revelation in ‘the 
Father and the Son’ is the indis- 
pensable test of fellowship. 

Io. εἴ τις ἔρχεται... Lf any one 
cometh... The form of expression is 
not found elsewhere in the Epistles 
or Gospel of St John. It assumes the 
case, and does not simply regard it as 
possible (ἐάν ris). By ‘cometh’ is to 
be understood an official ‘coming.’ 
St John is not dealing with the casual 
visit of a stranger but with that of a 
teacher who claims authority. 

The picture of the itinerating ‘ pro- 
phet’ in the Διδαχή is a vivid illustra- 
tion of the scene present to St John’s 
mind (§§ 11 f.). 

πρὸς ὑμᾶς) ‘the lady and her chil- 
dren’ vv, 1, 12. 

ταύτ. τ. ὃ. οὐ φ.1 and beareth not 
as his message, this doctrine of Christ 
which declares the Father and the 
Son, the decisive revelation of the 
Gospel. For φέρειν compare John 
Xvili. 29; Acts xxv. 18; 2 Pet. ii. τι. 
See also 2 Pet. i. 17, 18, 21; 1 Pet. i. 
13. The negative is not affected by 
εἰ, because it goes closely with the 
verb: εἴ τις [épy....xai od φέρει]. 

μὴ AauB....] nolite recipere...nec ave 
et diweritis V., receive him not...and 
give him no greeting.... These words 


11, 12] 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


231 


λέγετε: "6 λέγων yao αὐτῷ γαίρειν ὠνεῖ Tot 
Y ywv yap ᾧ χαίρειν κοινωνεῖ τοῖς 


La a 
ἔργοις αὐτοῦ 
τ Πολλὰ 


τοῖς πονηροῖς. 
ἔχων ὑμῖν γράφειν οὐκ ἐβουλήθην διὰ 


A \ μ > V9 ΄ t \ - 
χαρτου καὶ μέλανος, ἀλλα ἐλπίζω γενέσθαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς 
\ “ \ ‘ a - 
Kal @TOMa πρὸς στόμα λαλῆσαι, ἵνα ἡ χαρὰ ὑμῶν 


IL ὁ λέγων γάρ: ὁ γὰρλ. ς΄. 


στόμα (1°): -Ἐ τι N*. 


are to be interpreted with the limita- 
tion suggested by the character of the 
‘coming’: ‘Do not receive such a 
teacher as one who can justly claim 
the privilege of Christian hospitality 
as a brother; and do not even welcome 
him with a greeting of sympathy.’ In 
the N. T. χαίρειν is always used of the 
greeting of first address (Acts xv. 23; 
xxiii. 26; James i. 1); otherwise the 
context would perhaps suggest that 
the thought here is of the greeting of 
farewell: ‘Do not entertain such a 
one: do not send him on his way with 
good wishes.’ Clement adds: arbi- 
tror autem quia et orare cum talibus 
non oportet, quoniam in oratione quee 
fit in domo postquam ab orando sur- 
gitur salutatio gaudii est et pacis in- 
dicium (Fragm. Hypotyp. p. 1011 P.). 
Whatever may be thought of the ap- 
plication the picture of family devo- 
tion is of singular interest. 

11. κοινωνεῖ τ. €....] communicat 
operibus illius malignis V. Comp. 
1 Tim. v. 22: The word κοινωνεῖν 
implies more than participation in the 
definite acts. It suggests fellowship 
with the character of which they are 
the outcome. 

τοῖς €....rois mov.] Comp. 1 John ii. 
7 note. John iii. 19; 1 John iii. 12; 
Col. i. 21; 2 Tim. iv. 18. 


3. The conclusion (12, 13). 


The main request and the main 
warning have been spoken. Other 
subjects St John reserves for a per- 


12 ἔχων : ἔχω N*A*. 
ἀλλὰ ἐλπίζω NB the syrhl: ἐλπ. γάρ A vg me. 


γράφειν : γράψαι A. 
γενέσθαι: ἐλθεῖν ς the. 


ὑμῶν ΑΒ vg me: ἡμῶν δὲ syr hl (my the). 


sonal interview. A general saluta- 
tion closes the letter. Comp. 3 John 
13—I5. 

Though I have many things 
to write to you, I would not write 
them with paper and ink; but I 
hope to be present with you, and to 
speak face to face, that your joy may 
be fulfilled. 

3 The children of thine elect sister 
salute thee. 

12. IL. & ὑμῖν yp.] The pronoun (e. 
10) stands in a position of emphasis 
(contrast 3 John 13): the special cir- 
cumstances of those addressed sug- 
gested topics to the apostle. 

οὐκ ἐβουλ.] nolur V., 7 would not 
communicate them.... The aorist re- 
gards the letter as complete: the de- 
cision is made. Comp. 1 John ii. 14 
note. Some general word such as 
‘communicate’ must be supplied from 
‘write, 

διὰ x. καὶ μέλ.] per chartam et atra- 
mentum V. Jer. xxxvi. 18. 

ἀλλὰ ἐλπ. y. mp. v.] Spero enim me 
Suturum apud vos V., but I hope to 
be present with you. The delay in 
the communication was to be but 
brief. For γεν. zp. v. see 1 Cor. ii. 3; 
Xvi. Io. 

στόμα πρὸς στόμα] face to face, 
maby np (Num. xii, 8, Lxx. στόμα 
κατὰ στόμα). Comp. I Cor. xiii. 12. 

ἵνα ἡ χ. ὕ. πεπλ. ἢ] that your joy 
may be fulfilled. Comp. τ John i. 4 
note. 


232 


πεπληρωμένη ἦ. 
φῆς σου τῆς ἐκλεκτῆς. 


πεπλ. 7 (NS) B: ἡ werd. A. 


13. ᾽Ασπ. σε] Ὁ. 5. The singular 
pronoun answers to τῆς ἀδελφῆς. 

τῆς ἀδ.... τῆς ἐκλ.} 1 John ii. 7 note. 
The adj. ἐκλεκτός is found in St John’s 
writings elsewhere only in ¢. 1 and 
Apoc. xvii. 14. The verb ἐκλέγεσθαι 
occurs in the Gospel: vi. 70; xiii. 18; 
xv. 16, 19. 


ἦν δὰ". 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. [13 


΄ \ , - > 
3"AomaCeTai σε Ta τέκνα τῆς ἀδελ- 


13 ἐκλεκτῆς : - ἀμήν ς΄ syrhl. 


No sure argument as to the indi- 
vidual or corporate interpretation of 
κυρία (c. 1) can be drawn from the oc- 
currence of τὰ τέκνα τῆς ad. without ἡ 
ἀδελφή. On the whole however the 
general tenour of v. 13 seems to favour 
the corporate view. 


IQANOY Γ 


TQANOY T 


O TIPECBYTEPOC Γαίῳ τῷ ἀγαπητῷ, ὃν ἐγὼ 


ἀγαπῶ ἐν ἀληθείᾳ. 


The letter is marked throughout by 
personal circumstances, and is broken 
up into short paragraphs which are 
severally suggested by these. After 
the salutation (v. 1) St John (1) ex- 
presses in general terms his joy at the 
tidings of Gaius which he hears (2— 
4); and (2) specially approves his 
hospitality towards missionary bre- 
thren (5—8). In contrast with this 
generosity (3) he condemns the ambi- 
tious self-assertion of Diotrephes (9, 
10); and then (4) gives his witness in 
favour of Demetrius (11, 12); and so 
(5) concludes (13—15). 


1. The salutation. 


The salutation stands in contrast by 
its brevity with the salutations in the 
other personal letters of the New Tes- 
tament. The wish of blessing is trans- 
posed in another form to the following 
verse. 

"The Elder to Gaius the beloved, 
whom I love in truth. 

I. Ὁ πρεσβύτερος] 2 John 1 note. 

Taio τῷ dy.] The name ‘Gaius’ 
(Caius) occurs Acts xix. 29 (a ‘Mace- 
donian’); xx. 4 (‘of Derbe’); 1 Cor. 
i. 14 (a Corinthian); Rom. xvi. 23 (a 
Corinthian). There is nothing to 
identify this Gaius with any one of 
these. Another is mentioned as 
having been made bishop of Per- 
gamum by St John (Const. Ap. vii. 


46). The position which Gaius oc- 
cupied in the church to which he 
belonged is not shown by the letter. 
The epithet ‘beloved’ is afterwards 
used asa title of address (vv. 2, 5, 11). 
It occurs several times in salutations 
of St Paul: Rom. xvi. 12; Philem. 1 
(‘the beloved’); Rom. xvi. 5, 8, 9 (‘my 
beloved’); 2 Tim. i. 2 (‘my beloved 
child’). . 

ὃν ἐγὼ ay.) The emphatic personal 
pronoun (2 John 1) seems to point 
to some gainsayers with whom the 
apostle contrasts himself. Compare 
‘thou’ (ov) in Ὁ. 3. 

ἐν ἀληθ. Comp. 2 John 1 note. 
ἐν ἀληθείᾳ ἀγαπᾷ ὁ κατὰ Κύριον ἀγαπῶν 
(Gicumen.). 


2. The teacher's joy (2—4). 


St John, having much ground for 
sorrow and disappointment, begins 
with the expression of joy (comp. 2 
John 4). Some of his own children 
(comp. 2 John d.c.), Gaius among them, 
were loyal to the Truth. He could wish 
him nothing better than that all his 
circumstances should correspond to 
his spiritual progress. 

The salutation is completed, after 
the common model, in 7. 1. The se- 
cond verse adds what corresponds to 
the fuller Christian greeting (2 John 


3). 
ΞΒοϊουσα, I pray that in all things 


236 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[2, 3,4 


vA if \ f oe , > ὃ “- θ \ 
γάπητε, σέρι σπαντῶν EVYOMAL σε ευοοουσῦαι Και 


© , ει ᾽ a ἤ © , 
UYLALVELV, καθὼς εὐοδοῦταί σου ἢ ψυχή. 


3éyapny yap 


λίαν ἐρχομένων ἀδελφῶν καὶ μαρτυρούντων Gov TH ἀλη- 


t A \ μὰ & γος 
θείᾳ, καθὼς σὺ ἐν ἀληθείᾳ περιπατεῖς. 


3 ἐχάρην γάρ ABC me syr: om. γάρ ὃὰ vg the. 
καθὼς σύ: om. σύ A. 


(at the end of a line). 


thou mayest prosper and be in good 
health ecen as thy soul prospereth. 
3For I rejoiced (rejoice) greatly when 
brethren came (come) and bore (bear) 
witness to thy truth, even as thou 
walkest in truth. +I have no greater 
grace than these tidings, that I may 
hear of mine own children walking 
in the truth. 

2, ᾿Αγαπητέ] carissime V. (co. 5, 11). 
For the use of the plural see 1 John 
ii. 7 note. 

περὶ π. εὔχ. oe evod....] de omnibus 
orationem facio prospere te ingredi 
V. Jn all things 1 pray that thou 
mayest be prosperous... The phrase 
περὶ πάντων is remarkable. It may 
go with εὐοδοῦσθαι or with the sen- 
tence generally (comp. I Cor. xvi. 
1). The sense ‘above all things’ is 
not justified by any parallel in the 
N. T. or yxx.; and the context points 
to a contrast between ‘the soul’ and 
other things. The thought appears 
to be of the public and social work of 
Gaius as distinguished from his per- 
sonal progress, though ὑγιαίνειν may 
point to some illness. 

εὔχομαι] The word is rare in N.T.: 
2 Cor. xiii. 7, 9; Acts xxvi. 29; xxvii. 
29. 

evod. καὶ ὑγιαίνειν] The elements of 
progress and vigour are combined. 
For εὐοδοῦσθαι see 1 Cor. xvi. 2; 
Rom. i. 10. In St Paul ὑγιαίνειν is 
always used metaphorically of sound 
doctrine; but it occurs in the literal 
sense of sound health in St Luke: v. 
31, Vii. 10, XV. 27. 

καθὼς. «ψυχή) sicut prospere agit 
anima tua V. Ψυχή expresses here 
the principle of the higher life (‘soul’) 


4 werCoTépav 


μαρτυρούντων : μαρτυρουν B 


(Hebr. vi. 19, x. 39, xiii. 17; 1 Pet. ii. 
11, iv. 19). The nearest approach to 
this sense elsewhere in St John’s 
writings is John xii. 27 (x. 24). In 
other places he uses it only of the 
principle of the ‘natural’ life. 

3. ἐχάρην γάρ... Comp. 2 John 4. 
The joy which the apostle felt at the 
tidings of the action of Gaius is given 
in explanation of his far-reaching wish 
for his welfare, and not only as an 
assuratice of his spiritual well-being. 
The words evidently point to some 
difficulties from false teaching which 
Gaius had boldly met, though as yet 
the issue of his work was uncertain. 

épxop. ἀδ.] when brethren came not 
on one occasion only (ἐλθόντων) but 
from time to time, though all these . 
visits belonged definitely to the past 
(ἐχάρην) when the apostle wrote. The 
words give a vivid picture of con- 
tinued troubles even in the apostolic 
church. 

ἀδελφῶν] ve. 5, το. 
iii. 14 addit. note. 

papt. o. τῇ ἀλ.] testimonium per- 
hibentibus ceritati tue V., bore wit- 
ness to thy truth, attested the perfect 
and sincere loyalty with which you 
maintain the fulness of the Christian 
faith in life. Christian thought and 
Christian action are inseparable. 

καθὼς ov...) even as thou rwalkest 
in truth, truly. Comp. 2 John 4. 
The emphatic pronoun (σύ) suggests 
a contrast with others as (for exam- 
ple) Diotrephes. Gaius walked not 
only in word but really (ἐν ἀληθ. I 
John iii, 18) according to the standard 
of the Christian revelation (ἐν τῇ ἀλ. 
‘in the Truth’). The clause seems to 


Comp. τ John 


5] THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


237 


, ᾿ ΄ ΓΤ ‘ ᾽ 
τούτων οὐκ ἔχω χαριν, ἵνα ἀκούω τὰ ἐμὰ τέκνα ἐν 


“~ ey ,ὔ A 
TH ἀληθείᾳ περιπατοῦντα. 


4 τούτων οὐκ ἔ. x. NAB: τούτων x. οὐκ ἔ. C. 


τῇ ad. ABC*: 


B vg me: χαράν SNAC the. 


be one of those personal comments 
in which St John pausing on what is 
written, as it were, thinks aloud: 
‘They witnessed to thy truth; yes, 
and when the vision of vain profes- 
sions rises before me I know that 
thou at least livest indeed as thou 
teachest.’ 

4. μειζοτέραν...χάριν, ἵνα... mutjo- 
rem horum non habeo gratiam quam 
ut...V. I have no greater grace 
—favour from God—than these ti- 
dings, that I may hear... The plural 
τούτων ‘these things’ does not refer 
to what follows (‘that I may hear’) 
but to what precedes, the manifold 
testimonies which St John received of 
the courageous resolution with which 
Gaius maintained the Truth in the 
face of difficulties. The end assured 
by such tidings was the open acknow- 
ledgment of the fidelity of disciples 
(‘that so I may hear’). Even if St 
John had himself no doubt of the 
fact, it would be a joy to know that it 
was also observed by others. For the 
construction see John xv. 13 note. 

For the form μειζότερος compare 
ἐλαχιστότερος Eph. 111. 8. 

ἔχω χάριν] The use of χάρις is re- 
markable; but χάρις makes the ‘joy’ 
(χαρά) of the common text itself a 
divine gift. The word is very rare 
in St John (2 John 3 note). Here 
it expresses the divine favour in a 
concrete form. So it is used of the 
gracious gift of men: 1 Cor. xvi. 3. 
‘To have grace’ (or ‘a grace’) here 
corresponds with ‘giving’ (Rom. xii. 
6, &c.) and ‘receiving’ grace (Rom. i. 
5). Ἔχειν χάριν is used elsewhere in 
different constructions and senses: 
ἔχειν χάριν τινί Luke xvii. 9; 1 Tim. i. 
12; ἔ. x. πρός τινα Acts ii. 47. 


τὰ ἐμὰ τι) mine own children 


é A 
δ᾽ λγαπητέ, πιστὸν 


ἔχω: ἔχων Β΄. 
om τῇ SN. 


χάριν 


(Philem. το), not simply τὰ τέκνα μου. 
Those Christians to whom the apostle 
had been the human author of spi- 
ritual life: 1 Cor. iv. 14,17; 1 Timi 
2, &e.; 2 John 1, 13. Texvia, the title 
of affection, would be used of all to 
whom he at present stood in the po- 
sition of father: 1 John ii. 1, note. 

ἐν τῇ ad. περιπ.)] The phrase is not 
found elsewhere in N. T. Comp. ἐν τῷ 
ok. (ἐν τῇ ox.) π. τ John i. 6; ii. 11; 
ἐν τῷ φωτὶ π. τ John i. 7; ἐν αὐτῇ (τῇ 
ἀγάπῃ) π. 2 John 6. For the image 
see 1 John i. 6, note. 


3. The duty of generosity to the 
brethren (5—8). 


Gaius appears to have incurred the 
displeasure of some in his Church 
by entertaining strange brethren. St 
John emphatically approves what he 
had done, and enforces such hospi- 
tality as a Christian duty. 

In this brief notice we have a vivid 
sketch of the work and of the difficul- 
ties of the first ‘Evangelists’: Eph. 
iv. 11. Compare Doctr. of App. 11 ff. 

3Beloved, thou makest sure whatso- 
ecer thou dcest unto the brethren and 
strangers withal, ‘who bore witness 
to thy love before the church; whom 
thou wilt do well to help forward 
on their journey worthily of God ; 
tfor they went out for the Name's 
sake, taking nothing fromthe Gentiles. 
8We therefore ought to welcome such 
that we may be fellow workers with 
the truth. 

5. πιστὸν π.] fideliter facisV. The 
phrase is commonly interpreted : ‘thou 
doest a faithful work, a work which 
answers to thy faith: so cum. ἄξιον 
πιστοῦ ἀνδρός. No parallel is quoted 
in support of such a sense of πιστός. 
The more natural rendering is rather 


238 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[6,7 


ποιεῖς ὃ ἐὰν ἐργάσῃ εἰς τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς καὶ τοῦτο ξένους, 
Sot ἐμαρτύρησάν σου τῇ ἀγάπη ἐνώπιον ἐκκλησίας, ous 


καλῶς ποιήσεις προπέμψας ἀξίως τοῦ θεοῦ" 


5 ἐργάσῃ: ἐργάζῃ A. 


6 οὔς: ov Β΄. 
‘thou makest sure’; that is, such an 
act will not be lost, will not fail of its 
due issue and reward (Apoc. xxi. 5). 
This sense falls in well with the context 
(comp. Apoc. xiv. 13), and explains 
the use of the two verbs, ποιεῖν, ἐργά- 
ζεσθαι, which are combined also in 
Col. iii. 2 

ὃ ἐὰν épy.] The indefinite form (ὃ 
ἐάν as contrasted with 6) marks the 
variety of service. For ἐργάζομαι see 
John vi. 28, ix. 4; and for ἐργ. εἰς, 
Matt. xxvi. Io. 

καὶ τοῦτο &] et hoc in...V., and 
strangers withal. The fact that this 
detail is emphasised in the commenda- 
tion of the hospitality of Gaius seems 
to imply that it had been made the 
occasion of unjust blame. For καὶ 
τοῦτο compare 1 Cor. vi. 6; Phil. i. 
28; Eph. ii. 8. Viewed rightly the 
fact that these brethren were stran- 
gers gave them a more pressing claim 
upon the common ties of brotherhood. 
Comp. Hebr. xiii. 2 note. 

6. οἱ ἐμαρτ....1 Those who in one par- 
ticular case experienced the habitual 
hospitality of Gaius bore open testi- 
mony to his character iu a public as- 
sembly of the church where the writer 
was, gathered together, as it may seem, 
to receive their report: comp. Acts 
xiv. 26 ff For ἐνώπιον ἐκκλ. (not τῆς 
ἐκκὰλ.) compare ἐν éxxd. 1 Cor. xiv. 19, 
35: ἐν συναγωγῇ John vi. 59, xviii. 
20; 2 Mace. xiv. 5 προσκληθεὶς εἰς 
συνέδριον 7. a meeting of the Council. 
Doctr. Ap. iv. 14 ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ ἐξομολο- 
γήσῃ τὰ παραπτώματά σου. 

ods κι π. προπέμψας} guos benefa- 
ciens deduces (benefacies ducens)_V. 
Those who had before found help 
from Gaius now again required it for 
a special work. The future implies a 


καὶ τοῦτο NABC vg me the syrr: 
ποιήσεις προπέμψας: ποιήσας προπέμψεις C (lat). 


Τὑπὲρ γὰρ 


καὶ εἰς τούς 5. 


wish which, it is assumed, will at once 
be fulfilled. Comp. Rom. vi. 14. For 
προπέμψας see Acts xv. 3; Tit. iii. 13. 
The latter passage suggests that the 
word includes some provision for the 
journey as well as sympathetic attend- 
ance: Acts xxi. 3. St John regards 
the act in its completeness (προπέμ- 
was) and not in process (προπέμπων). 
This makes the combination of the 
aor. and fut. natural. For προπ. 
compare Polyc. Phil. 1 cuveyapny 


ae if 
ὑμῖν.. προπέμψασιν ws ἐπέβαλεν ὑμῖν 
τοὺς ἐνειλημμένους τοῖς ἁγιοπρέπεσι 
δεσμοῖς. 


καλῶς ποι.] Acts x. 33; James ii. ὃ 
(19); 2 Pet. i. 19; 1 Cor. vii. 37 f.; 
Phil. iv. 14. 

Compare Ign. Smyrn. τὸ Φίλωνα 
καὶ “Péov ᾿Αγαθόπουν, of ἐπηκολούθησάν 
μοι εἰς λόγον θεοῦ, καλῶς ἐποιήσατε 
ὑποδεξάμενοι ὡς διακόνους Χριστοῦ θεοῦ. 

ἀξ. τ. 0.1 worthily of their dedica- 
tion to the service of God: John siii. 
20. Comp. 1 Thess. ii. 12; Col. 1. 10 
ἀξ. τοῦ κυρίου. 

7. ὑπὲρ γὰρ τ. ov.) pro nomine 
enim V., for the Name's sake, that is, 
to make the Name better known: 
Rom. i. 5. 

‘The name’ is used absolutely Acts 
v. 41 (comp. Ὁ. 40 ἐπὶ τῷ dv. Ἰησοῦ). 
Comp. James ii. 7. It is also found 
in the letters of Ignatius: ad Eph. 7 τὸ 
ὄνομα περιφέρειν: ad Philad.tobo£acat 
τὸ ὄνομα. Comp. ad Eph. τ δέδεμαι 
ὑπὲρ τοῦ κοινοῦ ὀνόματος καὶ ἐλπίδος: 
id. 3 εἰ. οδέδεμαι € ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι οὔπω 
ἀπήρτισμαι ἐν Ἰησοῦ Χριστῷ. From 
the contexts it is evident that ‘the 
Name’ is ‘Jesus Christ’ (‘the Lord 
Jesus’), or, as it is written at length, 
‘Jesus Christ, the Son of God’ (John 
Xx. 31; 1 John iv. 15). This ‘Name’ 


8] THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


239 


΄ ἢ , 2 ΄ Α tA 2 i 
TOU ὀνόματος ἐξῆλθαν μηδὲν λαμβάνοντες ἀπὸ τῶν 


ἐθνικών. 


€ - ἐκ τ Ψ \ 
δἡμεῖς οὖν ὀφείλομεν ὑπολαμβάνειν τοὺς τοι- 


ΙΑ Sf A ᾿ ΄σ ᾽ r 
ovTous, iva συνεργοὶ γινώμεθα TH ἀληθείᾳ. 


7 ὀνόματος : -ἰ αὐτοῦ Elz. 
ὑπολαμβάνειν : ἀπολαμβάνειν ς΄. 
ἐκκλησίᾳ N*A. 


is in essence the sum of the Christian 
Creed (comp. 1 Cor. xii. 3; Rom. x. 9). 

When analysed it reveals the triune 
‘Name’ into which the Christian is 
baptized, Matt. xxviii. 19. Compare 
also 1 Pet. iv. 16 ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τούτῳ, 
Le. Christian. 

With the absolute use of ‘the 
Name’ may be compared the abso- 
lute use of ‘the Way’; Acts ix. 2, xix. 
9, 23, Xxiv. 22. 

See Additional Note. 

ἐξῆλθαν] profecti sunt V., they went 
Jorth from some Church, well known 
to the apostle and Gaius, on a mission 
of Truth, as others went forth on a 
mission of error (2 John 7; 1 John ii. 
19). Comp. Acts xv. 4o. 

μηδὲν au B....] taking nothing as 
their habitual rule. This trait is given 
not as ἃ simple fact (οὐδὲν λαμβ.), but 
asa mark of character. These teachers 
refused to receive hospitality from 
Gentiles who were unconverted. Many 
reasons may have recommended such 
a rule. St Paul alludes frequently to 
difficulties which arose even from that 
reasonable provision by the Church 
which St John here claims: 1 Thess. 
ii. 6 ff.; 1 Cor. ix. 14 f.; 2 Cor. xii. 16 ff. 
For λαμβ. ἀπὸ see Matt. xvii. 25. 

ἀπὸ τῶν ἐθνικ.] a gentilibus (genti- 
bus) V., from the Gentiles to whom 
they carried the Gospel. The form 
used (ἐθνικός) describes character ra- 
ther than mere position: Matt. v. 47, 
vi. 7, xviii. 17. It does not seem to 
be found in the uxx. 

ὃ. ἡμεῖς οὖν.. We therefore, as 
fellow Christians, owght (are bound, 
1 John ii. 6 note) to receive (support) 
such. The word ὑπολαμβάνειν (sus- 
cipere V.) gives the notion of wel- 


ἀπὸ τῶν : om. τῶν C. 
γινώμεθα : γινόμεθα Ο. 


ἐθνικῶν : ἐθνῶν ς΄. 8 
ἀληθείᾳ NBC vg: 


coming with hospitable support. 

ἵνα συν. yw. τῇ ἀλ.] ut cooperato- 
res simus veritatis V. The phrase is 
ambiguous. The fellowship may be 
either with the teachers: ‘that we 
may be fellow-workers with them in 
support of the truth’; or (better) with 
the truth, the substance of their teach- 
ing: ‘that we may help the truth which 
is effective through them’; comp. 
Phil. 1. 27 συναθλοῦντες τῇ πίστει τοῦ 
εὐαγγελίου and Bp Lightfoot’s note. 
The word συνεργός is not used else- 
where in the N. T. or Luxx with the 
dat. It is used with the gen. of the 
person with whom the worker coope- 
rates (6.9. Rom. xvi. 21 ὁ συν. pov, 1 
Cor. iii. 9 θεοῦ cuvepyoi), and with the 
gen. of the object, 1 Cor. 111. 9 συνεργοὶ 
τῆς χαρᾶς, τ Mace, xiv. 5. It is also 
used with eis (Col. iv. 11 συν. εἰς τὴν 
βασιλείαν) and πρός (2 Mace. viii. 7 
πρὸς τὰς...ἐπιβουλὰς συν.) of the ob- 
ject. The verb is used with the dat. 
of that which is helped, James ii. 22 
συνήργει τοῖς ἔργοις, τ Mace. xii. 1; and 
this construction is sufficient to sup- 
port the connexion of συν. with τῇ aa. 


4. The temporury triumph of 
ambition (9, 10). 

As yet St John had not succeeded in 
removing the opposition from which 
Gaius suffered ; but he makes it clear 
that the issue cannot be doubtful. 

91 wrote a few words to the 
Church; but he that loveth to have 
the preeminence among them, Dio- 
trephes, doth not receive us. For 
this cause, if I come I will call to 
remembrance his works which he 
doeth, prating of us with evil words ; 
and, since he is not content therewith 


240 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[9, to 


"Eypawa τι τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ: ἀλλ᾽ ὁ φιλοπρωτεύων 


αὐτῶν Διοτρέφης οὐκ ἐπιδέχεται ἡμάς. 


‘ ΄σ 
Oia τοῦτο, 


ἘΝ at « , > ms A at « - , 

ἐὰν ἔλθω, ὑπομνήσω αὐτοῦ τὰ ἔργα a ποιεῖ, λογοις 
ἊΝ a a ‘ \ t 4 ΄ 

πονηροῖς φλυαρῶν ἡμᾶς, καὶ μὴ ἀρκούμενος ἐπὶ τούτοις 


9 ἔγραψα N*AC: ἔγραψα ἄν N* vg syrr: 


syrr. 10 ἡμᾶς: els ἡμᾶς C. 

neither doth he receive the brethren 
himself and them that would he 
hindereth and casteth out of the 
Church. 

9. "Ἐγραψάτι] scripsissem forsitan 
V., I wrote a few words. The use of 
τι to express ‘something of import- 
ance’ is foreign to the N. T. and un- 
suitable to the context. St John 
treats his letter lightly. The letter, 
which may be regarded as the type of 
a class, has not been preserved. To 
escape from the difficulty supposed to 
be involved in the loss of an apostolic 
letter several early authorities intro- 
duced ἄν (as V.). 

τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ] to the Church to which 
Gaius belonged, as well as now to 
Gaius himself. St John had by this 
time heard that his letter had for the 
present failed. This is the only pas- 
sage in his Epistles (v. 6 is different) 
in which St John speaks of ‘a Church.’ 
The word ἐκκλησία does not occur 
in his Gospel. In the Apocalypse (as 
here) ‘the Church’ is always used of 
the special society in a particular 
place (comp. Apoc. xxii. 16 ἐπὶ ταῖς 
ἐκκλησίαις) ; 80 that St John nowhere 
gives a distinct expression to the 
thought worked out in Eph. i. 22, v. 
23 ff.; though he records the gift of 
its new life, John xx. 21 ff. 

ὁ φιλοπρ....Δ.7 ts qui amat prima- 
tum gerere in tis 1). V., he that loveth 
to have the preeminence among (or 
over) them.... The word φιλόπρωτος 
occurs in late Greek (Polyb. Plut.), but 
φιλοπρωτεύειν is not quoted from any 
other passage. The idea of πρωτεύειν 
governs the gen. αὐτῶν, which answers 


ἔγραψας B. ἔγρ. τι: om. τι SNE VE 


to ἡ ἐκκλησία (comp. 1 Cor. i. 2 τῇ 
ἐκκλ., ἡγιασμένοις). It is of interest 
to compare the two sources of failure 
noticed in the two Epistles, προάγειν 
(2 John 9) and φιλοπρωτεύειν, the un- 
due claims to intellectual progress 
and to personal authority. There is 
nothing to indicate that Diotrephes 
held false opinions : his ambition only 
is blamed. Comp. Herm. Zim. viii. 
7, 4 ἔχοντες ζῆλόν τινα ἐν ἀλλήλοις περὶ 
πρωτείων καὶ περὶ δόξης τινός: id. 7. 

οὐκ ἐπιδέχ. ἡ. In Ὁ. 10 the word is 
used of the literal welcome of visitors : 
here it is naturally understood of the 
recognition of the apostle’s wish as 
authoritative. Comp. 1 Macc. x. 1 
ἐπεδέξαντο αὐτόν (as sovereign); xii. 
8, 43; X. 46 ἐπεδ. λόγους; Ecclus. vi. 
26 eed. παιδείαν. By the use of ἡμᾶς 
(contrast ἔγραψα τ. 1 ἐγώ) St John 
removes the question from a personal 
issue. He identifies himself with the 
society (vv. 8, 12 ἡμεῖς, 1 John iv. 6; v. 
14 ἴ.). 

10. διὰ rovro...] St John implies 
that his personal presence will be de- 
cisive. By using the form ἐὰν ἔλθω 
there is no doubt thrown on the main 
fact of his coming (δ. 14). Comp. 1 
John ii. 28. 

ὑπομν. αὐτ. τ. &] commoneam ejus 
opera V., I will call to remembrance 
his works, 1 will bring them to his 
notice and to the notice of others. 
“Yropysmoxew is used with the acc. 
of the person (2 Pet. i. 12) and of the 
thing (2 Tim. ii. 14), and of both 
(John xiv. 26). 

λ. πον. pr. ἡ.] verbis malignis gar- 
riens in nos V., prating of us with 


11, 12] 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


241 


οὔτε αὐτὸς ἐπιδέχεται τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς καὶ τοὺς βουλο- 

μένους κωλύει καὶ ἐκ τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἐκβάλλει. 
WAyarnteé, μὴ μιμοῦ τὸ κακὸν ἀλλὰ τὸ ἀγαθόν. 

ὁ ἀγαθοποιῶν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστίν: 6 κακοποιῶν οὐχ 


ce 


᾿ t 
ἑώρακεν Tov θεόν. 


βουλομένους : ἐπιδεχομένους Ο the. 
ὁ δὲ κακοπ. ς΄ me. 


evil words (Matt. v.11; Acts xxviii. 
21). The adj. φλύαρος occurs 1 Tim. 
v. 13. 

μὴ ἀρκ. ἐπὶ t.] quast non et ἰδία 
suficiant V.. and since he does not 
rest content therewtth... ᾿Αρκεῖσθαι is 
used with the simple dat. Luke iii. 
14; Hebr. xiii. 5; 1 Tim. vi. 8. 

ovre...xal...] nec...et... V. John iv. 
Il. 

κωλύει... ἐκβάλλει] The verbs do not 
necessarily express more than the 
purpose and effort: comp. John x. 
32 (Matt. iii, 14). It is difficult to 
realise the circumstances of the case. 
It may perhaps be reasonably con- 
jectured from ὁ φιλοπρωτεύων that 
Diotrephes regarded the reception of 
the brethren as an invasion of his 
authority. 

ἐκβάλλει] Luke vi. 22; John ix. 34 f. 


5. The witness to the faithful dis- 
ciple (11, 12). 

Self-seeking may have its tempting 
successes, but they rest on no secure 
foundation. The faithful are supported 
by many converging testimonies. 

Beloved, imitate not that which 
ts evil but that which is good. He 
that doeth good is of God; he that 
doeth evil hath not seen God. *De- 
metrius hath witness borne to him 
by all and by the truth itself: yea 
we also bear witness; and thou 
knowest that our witness is true. 

II. ᾿Αγαπητέ...] The transition lies 
in the thought of the power which 
Diotrephes had won by wrong means. 

μὴ μιμοῦ] noli imitart V. Comp. 
2 Thess. iii. 7,9; Hebr. xiii 7. The 

W. J. 


ἐκ THs ἐκκλ.: om. ἐκ N. 


12 4 , eA ΄ 
Δημητρίῳ μεμαρτυρηται UTO σπαν- 


TI ὁκακοπ.: 


noun μιμητής occurs several times: e.g. 
1 Cor. iv. 16; Eph. v. 1. 

TO κι.τὸ ἀγ....1 malum...quod bo- 
num est V. Rom. xii. 21. 

dyaé,...caxom....] Mk. iii, 4; Luke 
vi. 9; 1 Pet. iii. 17. 

ἐκ τοῦ θ. é....0vx ἑώρ. τ. 6....] The 
two stages of divine relationship cor- 
respond with the two characters. He 
who does good proves by his action 
that his life springs from God as its 
source (εἶναι ἐκ τ. 6. Addit. Note on 
1 John iii. 1): he who does evil has not 
made the first step towards partici- 
pation in the Divine Nature (1 John 
iii. 6 note). In one sense the vision of 
God (the Father) in Christ (John xiv. 
9) is the condition of fellowship with 
Him: in another sense the vision of 
God as God lies beyond the power of 
man (John i. 18). 

It is likely that here, as elsewhere, 
St John points to men who professed 
to have deeper insight into truth and 
disparaged the importance of virtuous 
action. 

12. Δημητρίῳ μεμαρτ. From the 
unfaithful St John turns to the faith- 
ful: from the ‘evil’ to the ‘good.’ Itis 
likely from the context that, Demetrius 
was the bearer of the letter. For μαρτ. 
τινί see John iii. 26; Luke iv. 22; 
Acts xv. 8; and in pass. Acts vi. 3; x. 
22; xvi. 2; xxii12; 1 Tim. v. 10, &e. 

St John appeals to a threefold wit- 
ness given in favour of Demetrius (1) 
ὑπὸ π. by all, that is the general wit- 
ness of men arising out of the ex- 
perience of life; (2) ὑπ᾽ avr. τ. dd. by 
the Truth itself, so far as the ideal of 
Christianity was seen to be realised by 


16 


242 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


[13-.|1δ 


A € \ ᾽ ae 3 6 , ry ᾿ © ~ δὲ ἘΞ 
των καὶ ὑπὸ αὐτῆς τῆς ἀληθείας" καὶ ἡμεῖς δὲ μαρτυ 
δὰ “5: « ε , © “- ᾽ ᾿ 3 
ροῦμεν, καὶ οἶδας ὅτι ἡ μαρτυρία ἡμῶν ἀληθής ἐστιν. 
ἫΝ > > > , \ ΄ 
13 Πολλὰ εἶχον γράψαι σοι, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ θέλω διὰ μέ- 
, 2 ΄ὔ \ ἢ 
λανος καὶ καλάμου σοι γράφειν' "ἐλπίζω δὲ εὐθέως σε 
2 - \ ΄ A ΄ r λή 15 Ει a 
ἰδεῖν, Kal στόμα πρὸς στόμα λαλήσομεν. ἰρήνη σοι. 


ΕῚ € fi 
ἀσπαζονταί σε οἱ φίλοι. 
ὄνομα. 


12 τῆς ἀληθείας: τῆς ἐκκλησίας καὶ τῆς Gd. Ο: τῆς ἐκκλησίας A* (9). 
ς. ἡ μαρτ. ἡ. ad. ἐστ.: ad. ἡ. ἐστ. ἡ μαρτ. Ο. 


οὐ θέλω : οὐκ ἐβουλήθην A (2 ΦοΟΒῺ 12). 
γράφειν : γράψαι S. 
15 οἱ φίλοι : οἱ ἀδελφοί A. 


him; (3) καὶ yp. δὲ μαρτ. yea and we 
also bear witness: St John and those 
with him spoke with the authority of 
the Church. 

For the combination pepapr., pap- 
τυροῦμεν see John v. 33, 36. The 
witness given in the past was still 
effective while it was also complete: 
the witness of St John came with 
present fresh force. 

ὑπὸ π.} by all. It is possible that 
these words are to be taken quite 
generally: 1 Tim. iii. 7; though it is 
not necessary to extend them beyond 
the circle of Christians. 

καί...δέ...7 See 1 John i. 3. 

καὶ οἶδας] The words in John xxi. 
24 sound like an echo of this sentence. 

This verse serves the purpose of ‘a 
commendatory letter’ (συστατικὴ ἐπι- 
στολή 2 Cor. iii. 1). 


6. The conclusion (13—15). 


131 had many things to write to 
thee, howbeit I will not write to thee 
with ink and pen; “but T hope to 
see thee shortly, and we will speak 
Jace to face. 

sPeace be to thee; the friends 


14 σε ἰδεῖν ABC vg: ἰδεῖν σε SN me. 
ects τς δὲ . 
ἀσπάζου : ἄσπασαι &. 


’ Pa ‘ I 
ἀσπάζου τοὺς φίλους κατ᾽ 


οἶδας: οἴδατε 
13 γράψαι cor: γράφειν ς΄. 
σοι yp. NBC: yp. σοι A vg me the syrr. 
πρός: πρό B*. 


salute thee: salute the friends by 
name, 

13. εἶχον] The writer goes back to 
the time when the letter was begun. 
See 2 John 12. The variations in 
form are worth notice: ἔχων οὐκ 
ἐβουλήθην, εἶχον ἀλλ᾽ οὐ θέλω---ὑμῖν 
γράφειν, γράψαι σοι---διὰ χάρτου καὶ μέ- 
λανος, διὰ μέλανος καὶ καλάμου---γενέ- 
σθαι πρὸς v., εὐθ. σε ἰδεῖν---λαλῆσαι, 
λαλήσομεν. If the second Epistle was 
addressed to a Church it would not 
be difficult to shew that there is a 
fitness in the subtle differences in 
tone. 

15. Εἰρήνη σοι] Peace be to thee: 
1 Pet. v.14. Asa formula of greeting’: 
Luke x. §; xxiv. 36; John xs. 19, 21, 
26. And so (in combination with 
other words) in epistolary salutations: 
2 John 3 note. 

οἱ φίλοι) our friends. The word 
does not occur again in the Epistles in 
this connexion. Comp. Acts xxvii. 3. 
It gives a faint glimpse of personal 
relationships. Comp. John xv. 13 ff 

kar’ ὄνομα] per nomen V. Comp. 
John x. 3 (xx. 16). Polye. Pail. 13 


> G ᾿ς 2 4 
ἀσπάζομαι.. «πάντας Kat ὄνομα. 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Additional Note on v. 7. The Divine Name. 


The idea of the ‘Name’ (DY, ὄνομα) has a far deeper significance in 
Biblical language than in our own. As applied to God it expresses that 
which has been made known of Him; or, more exactly to distinguish the 
two factors in the revelation, that which he has made known of Himself, 
and which man can apprehend as addressed to him. Thus the Name of 
God does not represent His Essence as He is in Himself but the manifesta- 
tion of Himself which He has been pleased to give: that view of His 
Being and Character by which it is His will to be known, and under which 
He authorises man to address Him (comp. Gen. xvi. 13, xxxii. 29; Ex. vi. 3). 
And as applied to men the new name symbolises a new state, a new work 
and new powers for its fulfilment (Apoc. ii. 17, iii, 12, xxii. 4). 

Under this aspect the name of God is used in two ways. It may 
express some particular revelation, expressed by one definite title (Z/- 
Shaddai, Jehocah, Father), or the whole sum of these manifold revelations 
taken together as one supreme revelation (ὁ θεός, God). 

Hence it comes to pass that the ‘Name’ often stands for God Himself 
so far as it brings Him before man: Ex. xxiii. 21 (my Name is in Him, te. 
the Angel of the Covenant); 1 K. viii. 29 (the place of which Thou hast 
said: My Name shall be there); Is. xxx. 27 (Behold the Name of the Lord 
cometh from far). 

‘To blaspheme the Name’ was the same as ‘blaspheming the Name of 
the Lord’ (Lev. xxiv. 11, 16), that is blaspheming God as He had revealed 
Himself through Moses to His people (comp. Ex. vi. 3). And in the Acts 
(iii. 13, 16) it is said that the Name of ‘Jesus, the Servant of the God of 
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob’ gave strength to the lame man (comp. Acts 
iv. 30, 12). 

It follows as a natural consequence that the Divine Names in the Bible 
give in a broad outline the course of revelation. 

There is first the general name El, Elohim, which expresses man’s 
feeling after God, apart from any special revelation. 

Then follows the patriarchal title HiShaddai, which indicates the 
exercise of the sovereign might of God for the fulfilment of His counsel. 

Then the covenant name Jehovah, which is developed in the titles 
‘the Holy One, ‘the Lord of Hosts.’ 

Then follows a silence, when the Divine Name is unspoken. 

At last the revelation of the Father is given: ὁ πατήρ μου καὶ πατὴρ 
ὑμῶν καὶ θεός μου καὶ θεὸς ὑμῶν᾽ (John xx. 17). 

Two names present the two main views of God in the O. T., Elohim 
and Jehovah. The former, the generic name, gathers up what St Paul 
speaks of as τὸ γνωστὸν τοῦ Geo... ἀΐδιος αὐτοῦ δύναμις καὶ θειότης (Rom. i. 
19 f.), all that man is made to recognise little by little from the study of his 
own constitution and the world without. The latter, the proper name, 
gathers up all that God made known of Himself in His dealings with His 
people during the discipline of the first Covenant. Speaking generally 


16—2 


243 


The 

Divine 
ame in 

the O. T. 


244 


The 
Divine 
Name in 
the N. T. 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Elohim describes the God of Nature, Jehovah the God of revelation. The 
former includes the ideas of the creation, preservation, and general fixed 
government of finite things: the latter, the idea of living, progressive 
intercourse with men, of whom Israel were for the time the representa- 
tives. The great confession of the chosen people was to declare that the 
God of revelation is the God for Whom man’s soul craves, One in His 
infinite perfections: Deut. vi. 4 ‘Jehovah our Elohim (or is our Elohinv, 
Jehovah is One’ (comp. 1 John v. 20). For the use of ‘the Name’ abso- 
lutely see 2 Sam. vi. 2 (R. V.). 

Not to dwell in detail here upon the Divine Names in the O. T. it must 
be noticed that the idea of ‘the Name’ is no less prominent in the N. T. 
Thus the Lord characterises His own Mission as a ‘Coming in the Name of 
His Father’ (John v. 43); and the Mission of the Holy Spirit as a Mission in 
His Name (John xiv. 26 ὃ πέμψει ὁ πατὴρ ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί pou). He gloritied 
His Father and manifested His Father’s Name to men (John xvii. 4, 6) ; 
and it is the work of the Holy Spirit to glorify Him, and to take of His 
and declare it to His disciples (John xvi. 14). In the one case, if we may 
so speak, the Name of the Father was completely shewn : God was made 
known perfectly in this relation by the fact of the Incarnation. In the 
other case the Church is learning little by little the Name of the Son. 

The most complete expression of the Divine Name is that given in 
Matt. xxviii. 19 τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος, 
but the essence of this Name so written at length is the simple Name 
‘Jesus Christ’ or ‘the Lord Jesus,’ or even ‘ Jesus’ alone, when the context 
determines the office attached to it: ὄν. °L Xp. (Acts ii. 38, iii. 6, iv. το, viii. 
12, x. 48, Xvi. 18; ὄν. rod κυρίου “I. Acts viii. 16 (ix. 14) (xv. 26), xix. 5, 13, 
17, xxi. 13; ὄν. I. Acts iv. 18 (30), V. 40, ix. 27, xxvi. 9). 

In the Epistles the Name of revelation, the Lord’s Name, occurs in 
several forms: ‘the Name of Christ’: 1 Pet. iv. 14(16); ‘the Name of the 
Lord’: James y. 14 (? contrast τ. 10); ‘the Name of our Lord Jesus’: 2 
Thess. i. 12; ‘the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ’: 1 Cor. i. 2, 10; (τ. 4, 
vi. 113) Rom. i. 5; Eph. v. 20; (Col. iii. 17;) ‘the Name of Jesus’: 
Phil. ii. 10. Compare Additional Note on 1 John iii. 23. 

The phrase ‘the Name of God’ is found in the Epistles only in 1 Tim. 
vi. 1, besides quotations from the xx. (Hebr. vi. 10, xiii. 15), and the 
context explains its use. In the Apocalypse it occurs xvi. 9 (comp. iii. 12). 

The characteristic Name of God in the N. T. is ‘the Father’ (Matt. vi. 9; 
John xii. 28; comp. Additional Note on i. 2). 

From what has been said the full force of the phrases ‘to believe in the 
name’ (πιστεύειν εἰς τὸ dv. 1 John v. 13 note), ‘to ask in the name’ (John 
xiv. 13 note), ‘to be gathered in (into eis) the name’ (Matt. xviii. 20), ‘to 
have life in the name’ (John xx. 31) becomes evident. In every case the 
Name brings before the mind that aspect of the Divine Person which is 
realised by faith in each action of the spiritual life. 

In close connexion with the idea of the Divine Name is that of the 
Divine Glory (Introd. to Gosp. of St John pp. xlvii. ff). The Name expresses 
the revelation as it is apprehended and used by man. Man is called by the 
Name and employs it. The Glory expresses rather the manifestation of the 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST JOHN. 


Divine as Divine, as a partial disclosure of the Divine Majesty not directly 
intelligible by man (comp. Ex. xxxiii. 18 ff). In this relation it is of 
interest to notice that while St John’s Gospel is, in one aspect, a record of 
the unfolding of the Divine Glory in Christ, there is no mention of Glory 
in his Epistles. This is the more remarkable since the idea of Glory is 
found in the Apocalypse and in all the other Epistles except that to 
Philemon. 


245 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 


ὁ κόομος TlapdreTal, κἀὶ ἡ ἐπιθυμία ayToy. 


THE TWO EMPIRES. 


Tue foundation of the two Empires contemporaneous. 
The idea of the kingdom of God in the New Testament. 

δ τὴ in the subapostolic age. 
The contrast of the two Empires. 


The Christian Church a necessary object of persecution. 
The necessity, though not realised at first, lies in the claims of Christianity. 


1. Christianity universal. 
Roman religion national. 
Roman religious policy. 
View of Celsus. 
Corresponding idea of toleration. 
No toleration for personal conviction. 
Ancient idea of a national religion. 
2. Christianity absolute. 
Contrast with polytheism. 
No compromise possible. 
3. Christianity aggressive. 
Patristic view of idolatry. 
Idolatry to be met in social and domestic life. 
4. Christianity spiritual. 
Heathen confusion of temporal and spiritual powers. 


The Christian idea of the World embodied in the Emperor. 
Emperor-worship the climax of the imperial system. 
Growth of hero-worship. 
Two elements in emperor-worship. 

The worship of the Genius, 

The worship of power. 
Consecration of Julius Caesar. 

Rites of consecration. 
Worship of Augustus at Rome. 

τ a in the Provinces. 

Later consecrations. 

1. The effect of.the Apotheosis. 

z. The effect of the worship of the Genius. 


3. The law of treason. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: THE CHURCH AND THE 
WORLD. 


τὴ two Tue coincidence of the establishment of the Roman Empire with 
mpires 


founded at the rise of Christianity has always attracted the attention of modern 
oe historians. Even the early apologists saw a certain significance in 
the fact. Melito addressing Marcus Aurelius describes the Christian 
faith as a blessing of good omen (αἴσιον ἀγαθόν) to the reign of 
Augustus. ‘And as his successor,’ he adds, ‘thou wast welcomed by 
‘the prayers of the people, and wilt be welcomed if thou protectest 
‘the religious system (φιλοσοφία) which like a foster-sister grew with 
‘the Empire and commenced with him’’ The view thus given is 
however essentially false in its estimate of the relation of the two 
systems. Christianity was destined by its very nature not to save 
but to destroy the Empire: at the same time their outward cor- 
respondence was not less full of meaning. All that was progressive 
in the old world was united under one supreme head at the time 
when the new faith was revealed which should bind the universe 
together in a sovereign unity. Peace won by arms ushered in Him 
who revealed the peace of life in God. So it was that the only 
two powers which have claimed absolute dominion over mankind 
appeared together. For three centuries each followed the necessary 
law of its development. Then at last the Empire was seen to have 


' Melito, ap. Euseb., H. E. iv. 26, 8. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 251 


failed ; and the Church was seen to contain the forces which could 
regenerate and rule the world. Diocletian when he finally organised 
the old power of the State with the greatest political genius gave 
the occasion for the concentration of the power of the Church and 
prepared the way for its victory. 


The coincidence becomes more striking when account is taken of Chris- 
τ con tianit: 
the form under which Christianity was first presented to men. The pro. δ 
claimed 
asa 


‘a Kingdom of heaven,’ ‘a Kingdom of God,’ ‘a Kingdom of the Son Kingdom. 


‘of Man.’ The coming of the Kingdom was the keynote of the preach- Matt. iii. 
iv. 17. 
tt. xiii. 


message of the Gospel was essentially the proclamation of a Kingdom, 


ing of John the Baptist and of Christ Himself. The disciples were yf, 
the ‘sons of the Kingdom.’ As a King Christ died. During the jae ie 
great forty days He spoke of ‘the things pertaining to the Kingdom.’ ~ viil. 
When the faith was first carried beyond the limits of Judza Philip 
announced in Samaria ‘the Gospel of the Kingdom of God.’ The Acts xvii. 
burden of St Paul’s first teaching in Europe was that there was ” 
‘another King than Cesar, even Jesus.’ The same apostle when he Acts xx. 
sums up his work describes himself as having gone about ‘ preaching 39) 


‘the Kingdom of God’; and the last glimpse which is given of his 


labours at Rome shews him there still preaching the Kingdom. Acts | 
7 xxviii. 21. 
Everywhere the same idea is prominent in the history of the This iden 
Acts and in the Apostolic letters. At one time it excites the Foe 
hostility of unbelievers; at another time it gives occasion to mis- dee 


taken hopes in Christians. But however the truth was misrepre- rough 
sented and misunderstood, however much it gave occasion to unjust familiar 
attacks and visionary expectations, it was still held firmly. The oe 
idea may have grown somewhat unfamiliar to us now, but it is 
clearly impressed upon the New Testament. The distinctness with 
which we have learnt to realise our personal responsibility and 
personal relationship to God in this last age of the Church has 
brought with it some drawbacks, and this is one of them, that 
the sense of a visible Kingdom of God on earth established in 
righteousness and embracing all the fulness of humanity has been 


_deadened. 
Still the two aspects of the Faith—the individual and social— 


252 


Tllustra- 
tions of 
the belief 
in the 
next age. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


are not only reconcilable: they are complementary. Each is neces- 
sary to the completeness of the other. The individual view tends to 
selfishness and isolation, when the larger scope of redemption is 
neglected ; the social view tends to enthusiastic dreams, when the 
need of the transfiguration of every power of man is forgotten. So 
it was that the early millenarian extravagancies gained currency. 
But not to notice these, one or two illustrations will shew how the 
faith in Christ’s Kingdom in various shapes was a leading thought 
in the subapostolic age. It was natural that this belief should be 
most vivid in Palestine. Not long after the destruction of Jerusalem 
the kinsmen of Christ being of the race of David were brought before 
Domitian. He asked them, it is said, about Christ and His Kingdom, 
its character, and the place and time of its appearance, and when he 
heard that it was heavenly and spiritual and to be established at the 
consummation of the age he released them as poor and contemptible 
enthusiasts’. A generation later the belief in Christ’s Kingdom 
became more formidable. The Jewish zealots found the Christian 
teachers formidable opponents of their spurious patriotism. The 
Roman governors confounded both as forming a dangerous and 
disloyal body; and Symeon the son of Clopas, being accused by 
certain heretical teachers before the Roman Governor as a Christian 
and of the race of David, was crucified? To descend only one step 
further, Justin Martyr writing to Antoninus Pius says ‘when you 
‘hear that we look for a Kingdom you inconsiderately suppose that we 
‘mean a human Kingdom, while we mean a Kingdom with God, as is 
‘evident from the fact that when we are examined by you we confess 
‘that we are Christians, though we know that death is the penalty 
‘of confession. For if it had been a human Kingdom for which we 
‘look, we should have denied in order to save our lives and have 
‘endeavoured to remain undetected that we might obtain what we 
‘look for ; but since our hopes do not rest upon the present order, we 
‘do not heed those who take our lives, since in any case we must 
‘die*’ 


ah Hegesippus, ap. Buseb., H. E., Ὁ Hegesippus, ap. Euseb., H.£. iii. 32. 
lii. 20. 3 Just. M. Apol. i. τι. 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 253 


Even in this latest expression of the belief, the faith in ‘Christ a Chris- 
tianity 
must have 
a social 
embodi- 


social realisation. It deals with men not as isolated units but as meut- 


‘King’—the terms are practically synonymous—is still retained, and 


so it must always be. The Christian creed cannot stop short of a 


members of a commonwealth. Opinions may differ as to the form 
in which the society will be revealed, but the fact that Christianity 
must issue in the perfection of social life, and must manifest its 
power in dealings with social relations, cannot be lost sight of with- 
out peril to the dignity and essence of the Faith. 
It is, then, quite true to say that two Empires, two social organi- The con- 


8 : τ trast of 
zations, designed to embrace the whole world, started together in the tie ics 
first century. The one appeared in the completeness of its form: the Empires: 


other only in the first embodiment of the vital principle which 
included all after-growth. But the two Empires had nothing in 
common except their point of departure and their claim to univer- 
sality. In principle, in mode of action, in sanctions, in scope, in 
history they offer an absolute contrast. The Roman Empire was 
essentially based on positive law; it was maintained by force; it 
appealed to outward well-doing; it aimed at ‘producing external 
cooperation or conformity. The Christian Empire was no less essen- 
tially based on faith: it was propagated and upheld by conviction : 
it lifted the thoughts and working of men to that which was spiritual 
and eternal: it strove towards the manifold exhibition of one 
common life. The history of the Roman Empire is from the first 
the history of a decline and fall, checked by many noble efforts 
and many wise counsels, but still inevitable. The history of the 
Christian Empire is from the first the history of a victorious 
progress, stayed and saddened by frequent faithlessness and self- 
seeking, but still certain and assured though never completed. 


II. 


It is in the reality of this contrast, though it was but seldom Christian- 
. it Ξ 
consciously apprehended, that the final necessity of the persecution ey ee 


which was directed by the Empire against the Church must be Scuted. 


The ne- 
cessity not 
realised at 
first, 


and dis- 
sembled. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


found. For a time the waxing power might not seem sufficiently 
great to awaken the jealousy of that which was upon the wane. 
But sooner or later a conflict for existence was unavoidable ; and for 
this supreme struggle the earlier encounters were a preparation, 
revealing the character of the rival forces and shewing what interests 
were substantially at stake. 

At first, however, the nature of the contrast was not fully under- 
stood. The apologists constantly ask why a freedom of life and 
worship should be refused to the Christians which was granted to 
others. ‘We say the same as the Greeks,’ Justin Martyr writes, 
‘and yet we alone are hated for the name of Christ, and while we do 
‘no wrong are put to death as sinners, though men in different 
‘places worship trees and rivers and mice and cats and crocodiles..." 
‘In the Roman Empire,’ Athenagoras writes to Marcus Aurelius, 
‘men observe various customs and laws, and no one is prevented by 
‘law and fear of punishment from devotion to his national obser- 
‘vances even if they be absurd...But for us Christians you have 
‘taken no care, and you allow us though we are guilty of no crime... 
‘to be harassed and plundered and persecuted...°’ ‘Yet it is great 
‘folly to plead that we do not approach and admit the same gods 
‘as our several cities do. In fact the men who accuse us of not 
‘believing in any gods, because we do not hold the same as they 
‘acknowledge, do not agree amongst themselves about the gods... 
‘If then we are impious because we do not share their religion, all 
‘cities and all nations are impious; for they do not all admit the 
‘same gods®.’ 

The same kind of argument has been used with a different 
purpose by other authors. It is argued that some strange change 
must have come over ‘the mild indifference of antiquity’ if we are to 
receive the popular accounts of the persecutions. Appeal is made 
to ‘the universal toleration of polytheism’ as if that would have 
naturally admitted Christianity at least to the privilege of conni- 
vance. Insinuations are thrown out that if the Christians suffered 


they were themselves to blame. 


1 Justin M. Apol. i. 24. ? Athenagoras, Leg. pro Christ. c. 1. * id. c. 14. 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 265 


There is certainly a sense in which these statements are true. The 
: Ε : ‘ ssit 
The policy of heathenism was changed, because it had to deal with lay in the 
an antagonistic and not with a co-ordinate belief. The martyrs might "1qve 


have escaped tortures and death by the affectation or semblance of Chis, ἡ 
conformity to popular customs, but such conformity would have ἜΡΩΣ: 
involved a complete sacrifice of their faith. Christians were not 
contented with permission to exercise their personal religion without 
molestation: they demanded freedom for expansion and conquest. 

If indeed a distinct conception be formed of what Christianity is, it 

will be evident that a sincere and zealous pagan could not but perse- 

cute it. The Christian Faith is universal: it is absolute: it is aggres- 

sive ; and once more it is spiritual and not only temporal. On all 


these grounds it necessarily came into collision with the Roman laws. 


1. Christianity is universal. This characteristic places it at 1. Chris- 
tianity 
universal. 


once in opposition with every form of polytheism. Polytheism is 
distinctively national. The gods which receive the honour of any 
state are connected with it by special ties. Among the Romans this Nationa- 
belief was bound up with the whole history of their empire. The he 
pledge of their dominion was the venerable monument of their Το βίοι. 
ancient faith, The permanence of traditional rites was held to be 

the condition of the prosperity of the family and of the State. 

‘Sacra privata perpetuo manento’! was the principle which underlay 

the continuity of domestic life. ‘Sacra majorum perire nefas’? was 

the comprehensive rule which animated and controlled civil policy. 

In these two maxims that ‘ natural piety’ which gave coherence and 

unity to the growing’ commonwealth found a natural and effec- 

tive expression. Victory was the gift of the national gods: disaster 

was the retribution for neglecting them. ‘I have found that some,’ 

writes Arnobius, ‘who believe that their conclusions are very wise 

‘affect the airs and language of inspiration, and say, as if they were 
‘quoting an oracle, that since the race of Christians has come into the 

‘world the whole earth has been ruined, that mankind has been visited 


1 Cie. de Legg. ii, 9. 2? Serv. den. iii. τοις. 


256 


Roman 
policy as 
to religion. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


‘with manifold disasters, that the very gods have abandoned their 
‘customary functions, wherein they once used to bestow care on our 
‘affairs, and have been banished from the realms of earth....Nay 
‘more, exasperated by the wrongs and insults of Christians they send, 
‘it is said, pestilences and droughts, wars, dearth, locusts, mice and 
‘hail and other noxious pests by which the conduct of life is plagued’.’ 
A hundred and fifty years of Christian supremacy could not eradi- 
cate the feeling which survived the faith out of which it had grown ; 
and in the last and, in some respects, the greatest of the Apologies 
Augustine laboured to shew that the desolation of Italy was not due 
to the abandonment of the old national worship’. 

The conviction which was thus inwrought into the popular mind 
was adopted and used by statesmen. The language which Mzcenas 
is said to have addressed to Augustus when he set before him his 
views on the right administration of the Empire exactly expresses 
what a thoughtful Roman would feel on the claims of religion: 
‘Everywhere and in every way shew reverence for the divine power 
‘(ro θεῖον) yourself according to the rites of your fathers (κατὰ τὰ 
“ πάτρια) and compel all others to honour it. Those who introduce 
‘any strange opinion on the subject (τοὺς ξενίζοντάς [cf. Acts xvii. 20] 
τι περὶ αὐτό) visit at once with hatred and chastisement, not only 
‘for the sake of the gods, though he who despises them would not 
‘regard anything else, but because such men by introducing strange 
‘divinities (καινά twa δαιμόνια) in place of the old persuade many 
‘men to adopt foreign laws, and from this cause conspiracies and 
‘combinations and societies are formed, which are by no means 
‘expedient for a monarchy. Do not tolerate then anyone who dis- 
‘believes in the gods (ἄθεος) or practises superstitious arts (γόης) ᾽ 

The form of the words, which Dion uses, seems to have an oblique 
reference to what he had heard of the Christians of his own time, but 


1 Arnob. adv, Nat. i. 13. bueret si temporibus Christianis vide- 
° For example, after enumerating ret? Et tamen diis suis non ista tri- 
some of the disasters of the Empire buunt; quorum ideo cultum requirunt 
in pre-Christian times, Augustineasks: ne ista vel minora patiantur cum ea 
Talis itaque vanitas qualem ferimus majora pertulerint a quibus antea cole- 
eique respondere compellimur, quid bantur (Aug. de Civ. iii. 31). 
horum non Christianae relligioni tri- 5 Dion Cass. lii. 36. 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 


their spirit is perfectly consonant with that of the Augustan age. 
National usage was the criterion of worship. The sanctity which 
age brings to ceremonies and temples is exactly proportioned to their 
antiquity’ ‘Religious respect,’ to use the words of a later writer, 
‘is not lessened but increased by time.’ 

Such views were eminently characteristic of Roman policy, but 
they were not peculiar to it. The same thoughts were emphatically 
set forth as a general principle by Celsus in his work against Christi- 
anity. ‘Each nation,’ he says, ‘observes its national rites whatever 
‘they may happen to be. And this custom is advantageous, not only 
‘in so far as different people have conceived the idea of different 
‘institutions, and men ought to keep what has been ratified for 
“common use ; but also because, in all probability, the different parts 
‘of the earth were originally assigned to different presiding powers 
‘(éromrai) and distributed according to certain sovereignties, and 
‘are so administered. Consequently the observances in each nation 
‘will be rightly conducted if they are directed according to their 
‘several views; and it is impious (οὐχ ὅσιον) to abrogate what has 
‘been originally instituted in each particular place®.’ A universal 
religion, he says elsewhere, is absolutely inconceivable. ‘If anyone 
‘supposes that it is possible that the inhabitants of Asia and Europe 
‘and Africa, Greeks and barbarians, should agree to follow one law, 
‘he is hopelessly ignorant®.’ 

From these passages it is easy to see what was the corresponding 


The same 
eling 

expressed 

by Celsus. 


Corre- 
sponding 


idea of toleration. It was toleration based upon the mutual recog- idea of 


nition of partial claims. Its symbol and monument was the Pan- 
theon. As nation after nation was incorporated in the victorious 
body, new forms of worship received a limited sanction for the pro- 
tection of those who are already devoted to them. The conquerors 
accepted together with the province the duty of reverence to the 
unseen powers under whose guardianship it had been placed. In 
the striking words of a pagan advocate ‘they did homage to the 
‘vanquished deities while still inflamed with the wild passion of 
1 Minue. Fel. Oct. 6. 2 Celsus ap. Orig. c. Cels. v. 25. 
3 Id. ap. Orig. 1. 6. viii. 72. 


W. J. 17 


toleration. 


258 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


‘victory: they sought for strange gods and made them their own.... 
‘They took upon themselves the religious services of every nation in 
‘the world, and so deserved and won the sovereignty of all (dum 
‘universarum gentium sacra suscipiunt etiam regna meruerunt)',’ 
But this manifold worship was based upon the co-ordination and not 
upon the confusion of rites. It recognised a variety of obligations 
and not a freedom of choice: fixity and not indifference of form. No 
individual Roman could claim the personal right of adopting the 
tolerated ritual. The venerable law of the Twelve Tables remained 
unrepealed : ‘No one shall have gods for himself alone at his own 
‘pleasure, and men shall not worship in private new or foreign gods 
‘unless they be adopted by the State’ (separatim nemo habescit deos, 
‘neve novos sive advenas nisi publice adscitos privatim colunto).’ 
Nor did it remain unenforced. When from time to time under the 
Republic great calamities drove the people to look for help in strange 
ceremonies, the government vindicated the purity of the national 
religion and forbade the worship of foreign gods or of Roman gods 
in a novel manner®, Under the Empire, when the confusion of ritual 
was more widespread, the same principle was not unfrequently 
asserted and general restrictions were placed upon the celebration of 
strange ceremonies. Augustus would not allow ‘Egyptian rites’ to 
be performed within the pomerium, and when the rule was broken 
removed them a mile further from the city‘. Tiberius acted with 
greater severity when, as we may suppose, the forbidden worship 
was spreading among the Roman population. He suppressed ‘the 
‘Egyptian and Jewish rites’ throughout Italy by a decree of the 
senate, banished four thousand of the class of freedmen who were 
‘infected with that superstition’ and required all who held it to 
abjure before a certain day on pain of banishment from Italy’. A 
definite penalty was attached to the crime of proselytising. ‘If any 


‘one,’ it was enacted, ‘introduces new rites (relligiones) unknown in 


1 Minue. Fel. Oct. c. 6. Macroblus 3 Liv. iv. 30; xxv. τ; xxxix. 18. 
(1. 9) gives the formula of invocation Comp. Val. Max. i. 3. 
addressed to the deities of a besieged 4 Dion Cass. liii. 2; liv. 6. 
city. > Tac, Ann. ii, 85. Comp. Suet. 


* Cie. de Legg. ii. 9. Tib. 36; Josephus, Ant. xviii. 5 (4). 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 259 


‘use or principle (usu vel ratione), if he be of a higher station he 
‘is banished (honestiores deportantur): if of a lower he is put to 
‘death’.’ 

There were exceptional circumstances under which the State 
sanctioned the worship of strange deities, in which case any citizen 
might practise the foreign rites without reproach. Even Isis and 
Serapis found at last an acknowledged place in the public service? ; 
and it was the popular belief among Christians at the end of the 
second century that Tiberius and perhaps Hadrian, like Alex- 
ander Severus at a later date, had designed to extend this recog- 
nition to Christ’. But this coordination of new deities with the 
old brought no relief from the original obligations of the Roman. 
He could no more legally divest himself of his religion than of his 
country. To refuse homage to the gods of the State was essentially 
treason. 

It is obvious that Christianity could not under any circumstances No tole- 


- ᾿ Η ἘΣ a ration till 
claim protection from toleration, if it can be so called, based on yecent 


times for 
personal 


It could not take a place as one among many; and this was the ae 
101}. 


such principles as these. It came forward as a universal religion. 


utmost which ancient modes of thought could concede to it. The 
idea of toleration as expressing a respect for personal conviction was 
utterly unknown to the statesmen of the old world. It found no 
clear expression in the new world till the seventeenth century. 
The toleration of the Empire was in effect not unlike toleration in 
Russia now : it accepted diversities which had established themselves 
by actual existence, but it allowed no change away from the national 
faith, And yet more than this, at its first appearance Christianity 
could receive no benefit which such toleration as this could confer. 
It was a rebellion against the principle on which the toleration was 
founded. It was a new faith and therefore absolutely to be con- 
demned. Judaism had at least the attribute of antiquity. But no 
crime could be greater in the eye of a Roman legislator than to call 
again into question what had once been settled and gained general 

1 Jul. Paul. Sent. Rec. v. 21, § 2. Lamprid. Commodus, 9. 

3 Spartian. Caracalla, 9. Compare 3 Euseb. H. E. ii. 2. 

117--2 


260 


The an- 
cient idea 
of national 
religion. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


currency’. As time went on, however, the Christian Faith was gra- 
dually delivered from this accusation of novelty, though the rise of 
various forms of heresy frequently exposed the orthodox to the charge 
of innovation and fresh unsettling of the minds of men. The argu- 
ments of the apologists may have produced some effect by shewing 
that it answered to the earliest instincts of humanity. They could 
plead that in the consideration of eternity nothing is to be called late : 
that when there is no beginning and no end, nothing is before its 
time or behind it: that the divine counsels are one and fixed, mani- 
fested in a definite order and liable to no change*®. But even when 
Christianity had won by heroic endurance some consideration for age, 
when it was no longer condemned without a hearing for the fatal 
defect of recent origin, it stood none the less necessarily in antago- 
nism with the spirit of the Empire. It maintained, as we have seen, 
one universal form of religion against many national forms. And the 
consequences of the antagonism will be found to be more far reach- 
ing, if we consider a little more in detail what the Roman theory of 
a national religion was. 

According to this the national religion was a part of the his- 
torical development and habits of the nation, a mode of expressing 
certain thoughts and convictions which could no more be changed 
than language. The augurs might not believe their own art: gene- 
rals might despise it, but still Cicero adds: ‘Those who put to sea 
‘against the auspices deserve any punishment. They were bound to 
‘obey the claims of religion: they ought not to have set aside by 
‘arbitrary self-will the custom of their ancestors*.’ ‘No man’s spirit,’ 
says Cotta in another place‘, ‘be he learned or unlearned, will ever 
‘move me from the opinion which I have received from my ancestors 
‘about the worship of the immortal gods.’ 


1 Dioclet. ed. adv. Manich.: Diiim- debet. 


Varro in treating of the 


Maximi enim criminis est re- 


mortales providentia sua ordinare .et 
disponere dignati sunt, que bona et 
vera sunt, ut multorum et bonorum 
et egregiorum virorum et sapientissi- 
morum consilio et tractatu illibata 
probarentur et statuerentur: quibus 
nec obviam ire nec resistere fas est, 
neque reprehendi a nova vetus religio 


tractare que semel ab antiquis statuta 
et definita suum statum et cursum 
tenent ac possident (Cod. Greg. Lib. 
xiv. [rubr. iv.]; Haenel, pp. 45 ff.). 

3 Arnob. adv. gentes, ii. 75. 

3 Cie. de Div, ii. 33. 

4 Cic. de Nat. Deor. iii. 2, 5. 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 261 


Roman mythology admitted, according to Augustine, that his own 
judgment did not approve it, but said that ‘since it existed in an old 
‘people he ought to maintain it as it was received from the ancients, 
‘and that his writings and investigations were directed to that end 
‘that the common people might be more willing to worship the gods 
‘than to despise them'’ Nor is Augustine unjustly severe when he 
sums up the teaching of Seneca on the popular belief in the follow- 
ing words: ‘The man whom philosophy in some sense had made 
‘free, still because he was a dignified senator of the Roman people, 
‘worshipped that which he blamed, did that which he arraigned, 
‘adored that with which he found fault. Philosophy, we must con- 
‘clude, had taught him a famous lesson, not to be superstitious in 
‘the world, but for the sake of the laws of the State and the 
‘manners of men to recognise the duty of imitating an actor in the 
‘temple though he was not to perform his part upon the stage; and 
‘yet he was exposed to more just condemnation in that he played 
‘his false part so that the people thought he was in earnest, while 
‘the player rather gives pleasure by illusion than leads astray by 
“deceit?.’ 


2. Here then lies the second difference between imperial pagan- a ee 
ism and Christianity which made persecution inevitable. Christianity absolute. 
is absolute. It can admit no compromise. It is essentially grounded 
upon personal conviction and not accepted as an accident of descent. 

It is embodied in a Church which is held together by unity of faith ; 
and not.in a Nation which represents at least unity of race. 

Nothing struck the apologists with more amazement than the 
first natural consequence which followed from this difference between 
the Christian and heathen conceptions of religion. They saw the 
popular gods held up to mockery upon the stage, degraded in the 
works of poets, ridiculed by philosophers*, and they could not recon- 
cile such license and sarcasm with resolute devotion. But to the 


1 Varro ap. Aug. de Civ. iv. 31, 1. 3 Just. M. Apol. i. 4; Theoph. ad 
2 Aug. de Civ. vi. το, 3. Autol. iii. 3, 8; Tertull. Apol. 46. 


262 


THE TWO EMPIRES : 


polytheist of the empire—and to all later polytheists—the oftices of 
worship were an act of public duty and not of private confession. 
Outward conformity in act was owed to the State, complete freedom 
in opinion and word was allowed to the worshipper. There was no 
complete and necessary correspondence between the form and the 
thought. With the Christian it was otherwise. His religion in 
every detail was the expression of his soul. So it was that the 
Christian confessor would make no compromise. This phenomenon 
was a novel one; and we can see in the records of the martyrdoms 
how utterly the magistrates were incapable of understanding the 
difficulty which Christians felt in official conformity. In their judg- 
ment it was perfectly consistent with religious faith to drop the 
morsel of incense on the fire, and still retain allegiance to Christ. 
All that they required was the appearance of obedience and not the 
distinct expression of conviction. ‘Have regard for thy gray hairs’ 
or, ‘for thy tender youth’ was the common appeal of a merciful 
judge. who failed to apprehend that the faith of the Christian like his 
own being was one. ‘“‘ What harm is it to say “Ὁ Lord Cesar’ and to 
‘sacrifice and be saved,” was the well-meant expostulation which 
was addressed to Polycarp on his way to trial’. When Dionysius 
of Alexandria was brought before the magistrate he was urgently 
pressed to do honour to the gods who were the saviours of the 
Empire. ‘We believe in one God and Maker of all things,’ was his 
reply, ‘who gave the empire into the hands of Valerian and Gal- 
‘lienus; Him we reverence and worship; and to Him we pray 
‘constantly that their empire may remain undisturbed.’ ‘Who 
‘prevents you then,’ was the answer, ‘from worshipping Him also if 
‘indeed he is a god together with the natural gods*? 

We have passed now into a region of religious thought so different 
from that of polytheism, that it is perhaps difficult for us to feel the 
sincerity of such words. Still undoubtedly they were sincere ; and to 
refuse to listen to them was held to be, as Pliny said, criminal obsti- 
nacy. But the concession which seemed reasonable to the polytheist 
was impossible to the Christian, because his faith was personal. To 


1 Buseb. H. E. iv. 15, 13. ° Td. vii. 11, 6. 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 


abandon wilfully the least fragment of it was to abandon all. When 
the father of Perpetua, an African martyr, sought to turn her from 
confession by consideration for his own sorrow, ‘ My father,’ she said, 
‘do you see this vessel lying here, a flagon or the like?’ ‘I see it,’ he 
said. ‘Can it then be called by any other name than what it is?’ And 
he said, ‘No.’ ‘So I,’ she continued, ‘ cannot say that I am anything 
‘but what I am, a Christian’.’ Thus the acceptance of the faith was 
personal, and the faith itself was personal. It sprang from the devo- 
tion of the whole soul: it was directed to one who was known to be 
a loving Lord. ‘Do you suppose,’ said the prefect Rusticus to 
Justin, ‘that you will ascend up to heaven to receive some recom- 
‘pense there?’ ‘I do not suppose,’ was the martyr’s ready correction, 
‘but I know it (οὐχ ὑπονοῶ ἀλλ᾽ ἐπίσταμαι καὶ πεπληροφόρημαι)".᾽ 
When the proconsul urged Polycarp to reproach Christ he could but 
make one answer: ‘ Highty and six years have I continued to serve 
‘Him, and He has done me no wrong. How then can I speak evil 
‘of my King who saved me*?’ Even a young boy could declare when 
the offer of pardon and favour was made to him on the condition 
of renouncing Christ, ‘I am Christ’s servant. I confess Him with 
‘my mouth. I bear Him in my heart. I worship Him without 
‘ceasing*.’ Out of this personality of faith, consecrated by the opera- 
tions and ordinances of one Spirit, grew a body greater and nobler 
than a nation. ‘There was a time,’ Tertullian says to his heathen 
readers, ‘ when we also laughed at the doctrines which we now teach. 
‘We come from among your number. Christians are made Chris- 
‘tians and not born Christians (fiunt non nascuntur Christiani)°.’ 
The words which are true now in a spiritual sense were true to a 
large measure literally in the first centuries. In this way the con- 
ception of the grandest visible communion of men was gradually 
defined. If lineage has no authoritative power to impose a creed, 
there must be a society beyond the state answering to the free 
harmony of spiritual fellowship. At present it is sufficient simply 


1 Acta SS. Perpet. et Felic. 8 i. 2. v. 15, 16. 
2 Acta 5. Justini, § 5. 4 Acta S. Felic. § 3. 
3 Mart. Polyc.§ 6. Euseb. H. E. 5 Tertull. Apol. 18. 


263 


264 


3. Chris- 
tianity ag- 
gressive. 


Idolatry 
inspired 
by evil 
spirits. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


to notice the necessity of this last antagonism of the Church and the 
Empire. We shall have to consider afterwards the form in which it 


was manifested, 


3. Since Christianity claimed in this way to be a universal and 
absolute religion, it was necessarily aggressive. Not only was the 
Christian unable to admit that the old faiths ought to receive any 
respect from himself: he felt also that they were positively false and 
pernicious. They must be assailed and not tolerated. ‘We affirm,’ 
writes Justin Martyr, ‘that the spirits (δαίμονας) who did [what is 
‘recorded in the heathen mythologies] not only were not gods but 
‘were evil and unholy spirits whose actions are not like those even 
‘of men whose heart is set on virtue. For that cause we are called 
‘atheists; and we confess that we are atheists in respect of such 
‘ gods as are popularly received, but not in respect of Him who is the 
‘most true God, the Father of justice and temperance and every other 
‘virtue, untouched by evil’.’ So it was that one of the first popular 
cries against the Christians was ‘Away with the atheists’. ‘We 
‘are guilty,’ Tertullian pleads, ‘if you can prove that your gods are 
‘gods. But we appeal from yourselves to your own conscience. I 
‘am content for that to judge us, to condemn us, if it can deny that 
‘all your vaunted gods were men*.’ 

But, as we have already seen, while the Christian affirmed that 
the heathen gods were no gods, he attributed to them and to their 
worship a malignant spiritual power. It was in this way, he held, 
that the evil spirits—demons—tried to thwart the counsels of God, 
enslaving men to themselves, deceiving them by false prodigies, 
diverting them from the sources of truth, bringing discredit on the 
faith, stirring up persecution, and that with the greatest success 
because they knew much of the divine scheme‘. These, it was 


argued, invested with a semblance of life the worship of the dead, 


1 Just. Apol. i. 5: for μὴ ὀρθούς read 3. Tertull. Apol. το. Comp. Athenag. 
μὴ θεούς. Comp. § 13. Leg. pro Christ. 4 ff. 
_ ? Mart, Polyc. § 9. Euseb. H. E. 4 Just. M. Apol. i. 14, 123 Apol. ii. 
iv. 15, 15. 19, 8. 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 265 


and the worship of idols, striving to keep men from searching for 
the true God. ‘It is not men who persecute us of themselves,’ Lac- 
tantius writes, ‘for they have no cause of anger against the inno- 
‘cent; but those stained and lost spirits, who know the truth and 
‘hate it, introduce themselves into their minds and goad them unwit- 
‘tingly to madness...... seeking either to diminish through suffering 
‘the faith of those who believe, or to remove them wholly from the 
‘earth...... os 


This conviction gave a stern reality to the conflicts of the The 
martyrs 


martyrs. Their struggle was not against mere phantoms and contended 
- ith 
names, but against actual powers of darkness. ‘Who art thou,’ pebsonal 


Trajan is reported to have said to Ignatius, ‘that strivest to trans- a a 
“gress our ordinances, thou man of an evil spirit (κακοδαίμων) 1" ‘No 
‘one,’ Ignatius replies, ‘misnames the man who bears God within 
‘him a man of an evil spirit: for the spirits depart from the ser- 
‘vants of God. But if thou callest me evil towards the spirits 
‘because I vex them, I accept the title; for since I possess Christ 
‘the heavenly King, I destroy their devices®.’ ‘I have already told 
‘you,’ said Symphorian to the judge before whom he was accused 
of dishonouring the statue of Cybele, “1 am a Christian. I worship 
‘the true God who reigns in heaven. The image of a demon I 
‘not only do not worship, but if you allow me at my own risk I 
‘will dash it to pieces*.’ 

The intensity of this belief could not but manifest itself in ἐπε τὰ 
all the details of life. The pagan temples were to Christians like nism _ 
unclean sepulchres, of which they were tempted to shew their ere 
loathing openly*. ‘How long,’ said a bishop when he passed by 
a temple erected to the Genius of the Emperor whom he had just 
left, ‘how long shall this tomb stand’? ‘A Christian,’ Celsus says, 
‘argues, Lo I stand by the statue of Zeus, or Apollo or whatever 
‘God it may be, and revile it and smite it and it takes no vengeance 


‘on me®”’ And though Origen condemns such conduct as lawless and 


* Lactant. Instit.v.22. Comp.ii.17. Oct. 8. 

2 Mart. Ign. § 2. 5 Amm, Marcell. xxii. rr. 
3 Acta S. Symphor. § 2. 6 Orig. c. Cels. viii. 38. 

+ Tertull. de idol. 13. Minue. Fel. 


266 


in domes- 
tic life. 


THE TWO EMPIRES : 


rude, it is easy to see that zeal would often be carried beyond the 
limits of reason and good order. Heathenism indeed was so mixed 
up with the ordinary routine of society and home that the believer 
would be forced to stand in a position of continual protest. The 
proceedings of the courts, the public ceremonies, the ordinary 
amusements were more or less connected with idolatrous forms 
or observances. The smoking altar constantly called for some sign 
of abhorrence’. The universal presence of the images of the gods 
made watchful caution a necessity for the believer. The common 
language of familiar conversation often required a disclaimer of 
the superstition on which it was framed’. 

Thus it was that in the ordinary conduct of social intercourse, 
and in the closer relationships of life, collisions between Christian 
conviction and heathen practice were necessarily more frequent 
and more perilous. Tertullian has left a lively and well-known 
picture of the difficulties which from hour to hour beset a Christian 
wife married to a heathen. ‘She certainly cannot,’ he writes, 
‘satisfy the Lord when she has beside her a slave of the devil, 
‘an agent of his master to hinder the objects and duties of the 
‘faithful ; so that if she has a station to keep, her husband makes 
‘an appointment early to meet her at the baths: if a fast is to 
‘be observed, her husband on the same day has a feast: if she 
‘has to go out, then above all other times engagements with her 
‘household interfere...’ ‘Will you be unobserved,’ he continues 
addressing the woman, ‘when you sign [i.e. with the cross] your 
‘couch, your person, when you express outwardly your abhorrence 
‘(flatu explodis) of something unclean, when you rise up even by 
‘night to pray? and will you not seem to be engaged in some rite 
‘of magic? Your husband will not know what you taste in secret 
‘before every meal; and if he learns that it is bread, he does not 
‘believe that it is that which it is said to be. And while he is 
‘ignorant on this, will he in each case be ready simply to admit 
‘your explanation, without an expression of sorrow, without a sus- 
*picious question whether it be bread or poison®?’ 


1 Tertull. de idol. τι. 2 Id. ot. 3 Tertull. ad uzor. ii. 4, 5. 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 267 


Under such circumstances the Christian could not but be The 


brought frequently into direct opposition to the popular faith, how- eee 


by ex- 
ceptional 
liberally he might interpret the law of charity. The cases might acts. 


ever carefully he might avoid positions of danger, and however 


be rare where the conscript refused to serve in the army or accept 
the badge of his enlistment!, where the soldier refused to imitate 
his comrades in wearing the crown which he interpreted as the 
symbol of slavery to a heathen power’, where the yearly banquet 
on the emperor’s birthday stirred the conscience of the centurion 
and moved him to cast off the symbol of his profession*; but 
these kept the idea of the conflict present to the minds of men, 
and invested the smaller divergences in thought and conduct with 


their real importance. 


4. In this way Christianity challenged persecution. It was 4. Chris- 
universal and therefore it could not acquiesce in a place beside beta 
national religions: it was absolute and therefore it could not yield 
the tribute of conformity to the state worship: it was aggressive, 
because it was universal and absolute, and therefore it could not 
in the end fail to come into conflict with the civil power. These 
characteristics are all consequences or special forms of one funda- 
mental characteristic, Christianity was spiritual and not temporal. 

For the Christian the state was not the highest power. He owed 
allegiance to a greater Sovereign than the Emperor. 

This essential difference between the two Kingdoms may be Confusion 


expressed in another form. In the Empire the spiritual and tem- pl loa 

poral powers, the ideas of worship and law, of progress and order, sei ‘6 

were completely confused: in Christianity they are distinctly se- ae ; 
mpire. 


parated. Just as all the various functions of government were con- 
centrated in the Emperor, so also the traditional reverence for 
natural ties, for all that in which the ancestral ‘pietas’ found 
scope, was directed to him. As the gods were removed further 
from the affairs and thoughts of men, the state became the symbol 


1 Acta S. Maximiliani, Ruinart, p. 2 Tertull. de cor. mil. 1. 
300. 3 Acta S. Marcelli, Ruinart, p. 302. 


268 THE TWO EMPIRES: 


of that which was permanent and sovereign; and in the Emperor 
the state was personified. The principle was laid down from the 
first but it was only realised by degrees. It was natural that 
Augustus should refuse the title of ‘Lord':’ it was hardly less 
natural that Domitian should claim to be styled ‘Our Lord and God’.’ 


11. 


TheWorld The claim of Domitian is a startling illustration of a fact which 


embodied . : 
in the has an important bearing on apostolic thought and language. The 


a position assumed by the Roman Emperor gave a distinctness to the 


conception of ‘the world’ in the first age which it is very difficult for 
us now to realise. ‘The world’ was not then an abstraction but, to 
take an obvious illustration, the most definite power which received 
worship at Ephesus in the time of St John. The inscriptions which 
decorated the places of public resort could not fail to keep before the 
inhabitants of that city this clear and intelligible service in which 
that which is earthly obtained consecration in its earthliness. In 
the Emperor ‘the world’ found a personal embodiment and claimed 
divine honour. 


Emperor The growth of the worship of earthly sovereignty is a singular 
worship Ἢ : ᾿ f Pet 
the climax episode in the history of the Empire, or rather it is the essential 


f th : : : 
Teper moral of it. As the faith which was founded upon sacrifice 


system. grew to be a supreme power, so on the other side men found in 
triumphant force that which could command their immediate 
homage. On a selfish view of life, where the visible is the measure 
of hope and aspiration, this is indeed the necessary end to which 
worship comes. That which may have been the worship of heroes 


1 Suet. Oct. 53. been struck during the lifetime of the 

3 Suet. Domit. 13. There are two Emperors. Eckhel, l.c. There isacon- 
coins of Aurelian which bear the in-  secration coin of the latter Emperor 
scriptions: Dco et domino nato (comp. with the inscription : θεω Kapw ceB 
Bullet. di Arch. Christ. x. 8. 1883 pp. and on the reverse adtepweic: Eck- 
61 f.) and Deo et domino nostro. The hel, vii. 509. 
head of the Emperor is rayed and on On the use of the titles Dominus 
the reverse is the inscription: Restitut. and Deus on coins see Spanheim, De 
orbis. Eckhel, vii. 482. Therearethree  prast. et usu nummorum, ii. 482 ff.; 
types of coins of Carus with the inscrip- 489 ff. Compare also Tert. dpol. 34 
tion : Deo et domino Caro. Eckhel, and on the other hand Dion Cass. lv. 
vil. 508. These coins seem to have 12 (δεσπότης). 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 269 


degenerates into the worship of conquerors. The idolatry of service 
passes into the idolatry of success. 


The later period of Grecian history shews the transition from The 
growth of 
hero- 
worship. 


the adoration of the unseen to the adoration of the seen, from the 
conception of gods to the conception of divine men, whose divinity 
was recognised first in true nobleness and then in mere strength’. 
The certain symptoms of the change are found in the time of the 
Peloponnesian War, but as yet the feeling which guided it was 
generous. The honours which the people of Amphipolis paid to 
Brasidas were at least given to one who had died for the inde- 
pendence of their city*; and Lysander to whom first religious 
honours were paid while still living had crowned his country with 
a decisive victory®. Even in the next stage the magnificent exploits 
of Alexander might seem to offer some excuse for the assumption 
of more than human dignity; but with his successors in Syria 
The old beliefs 


Euhemerus had laboured to shew that the persons 


and Egypt simple selfishness was consecrated‘. 
had died out. 
of the popular mythology were mortal heroes, and there was no 


1 It is said that Darius the father of 
Xerxes first received from the Egyp- 
tians the title of ‘God’ in his life- 
time. Diod. Sic. i. 95. 

? Thucyd. v. 12. So the Syracusans 
gave to Dion ‘the honours of a hero:’ 
Diod. Sic. xvi. 20. Herodotus gives 
an earlier example of hero-worship, 
which he says was unprecedented, in 
the case of Philippus of Crotona, a 
victor at Olympia, and the hand-: 
somest man of his time, After his 
death, he says, the Egestwans, διὰ 
τὸ ἑωὑτοῦ κάλλος... ἐπὶ τοῦ τάφου αὐτοῦ 
ἡρῷον ἱδρυσάμενοι θυσίῃσι αὐτὸν ἱλάσκον- 
ται (Herod. v. 47). 

3 Plut. Lysander, 18. Comp. Athe- 
nag. Leg. 14, who gives other examples. 
Honours similar to those paid to Ly- 
sander were paid to T. Quinct. Flami- 
ninus at Chalcis in the time of Plutarch 
(ἔτι καὶ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς). This was the close 
of the Pean sung at the sacrifice in his 
honour: μέλπετε, κοῦραι, 

Ζῆνα μέγαν Ῥώμαν τε Τίτον 6 

Ῥωμαίων τε πίστιν. 


> oe 


ἅμα 


Ἰήιε Παιάν, ὦ Tire σῶτερ. 
Plut. Titus, c. 16. 

Suetonius speaks of the erection of 
temples in honour of proconsuls as 
an ordinary honour: Templa quamvis 
sciret [Augustus] etiam proconsulibus 
decerni solere, in nulla tamen provin- 
cia nisi communi suo Romeque no- 
mine recepit (Oct: ¢. 52). So Cicero 
takes credit to himself for having de- 
élined the compliment: Ep. ad Att. x. 
241. 7; ad Quint. fr. i. 1, 26. Butin 
such cases the temple was not erected 
to the officer, but in honour of him, 
though the transition from the one 
thought to the other became easy a- 
mong degenerate races. 

The worship of the Roman Emperors 
has been treated exhaustively by L’Abbé 
E. Beurlier in his Essay Le culte im- 
périal, son histoire et son organisation, 
depuis Auguste jusqwa Justinien, Paris, 
1891. 

i For the worship of the Ptolemies 
see Theocr. Id. xvii. 

It was with better reason that Deme- 


270 


Extends to 
Rome. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


longer any faith behind, which such beings could embody and repre- 
sent. It was then only a step to substitute a power present at 
least and real for that which was not different in kind and obscured 
by time. Great sovereigns were felt to be more powerful than the 
ancient gods; and the language in which Tertullian describes the 
popular feeling of his own time in Africa was already true three or 
four centuries earlier in the kingdoms of Alexander’s successors. 
Atheism was a less serious charge than disloyalty. The majesty of a 
god was less august than that of a monarch; ‘for,’ he adds, saying 
of his countrymen what was equally applicable to the subjects of an 
Antiochus or a Ptolemy, ‘you regard the Emperor with a greater 
‘dread, and more calculating fearfulness than Olympian Jove him- 
‘self...you would sooner forswear yourselves by all the gods than by 
‘the single genius of Cesar’. 

The general unbelief in spiritual powers which thus grew up in 
the Greek kingdoms of the East after the conquest of Alexander’ 
soon spread to the West. The speculations of Euhemerus found an 
advocate at Rome in the poet Ennius*, At the same time however 
the national Italian faith in the gods of the family—the Lares, 
the Manes, the Genius—modified the results which they were 
Such a. faith declared that in man there is 
The life of the family, 


of the clan, of the state was acknowledged to be Divine, and to have 


calculated to produce. 


something more than what is called human. 


a connexion with an unseen order. ‘Roma’ was already worshipped 
as a goddess, and assumed before long the figure and attributes of 


Pallas*. If the belief in the ancient divinities was gone, some con- 


trius obtained divine honours at Si- 
cyon: τιμῶν ἰσοθέων ἔτυχε παρὰ τοῖς εὖ 
παθοῦσι (Diod. Sic. xx. 102). 

1 Tertull. Apol. 28. Minue. Fel. Oct. 
29. Compare the song in Athen. vi. 63. 

3 Comp. Beurlier, De divinis hono- 
ribus quos acceperunt Alexander et suc- 
cessores ejus, Paris, 1891. He combats 
Mr Hogarth’s view (English Hist. Rev. 
pp. 317 ff.) that ‘the deification of 
‘Alexander was wholly posterior to his 
‘decease’ on pp. 20 ff. 

3 Cie. de Nat. Deor. i. 42, 110. 

* The Smyrneans claimed to be the 


first who erected a temple to Rome 
B.c. 195 (Tac. Aun. iv, 56). The wor- 
ship spread even to Britain. In the 
Library of Trinity College there is an 
inscription on an altar found at ‘ Ro- 
‘chester in Rhedesdaile’ which bears 
at the head the letters ". κα. 5. (D[ew] 
Rfome] S[acrum]). Comp. Mommsen, 
Inserr. Latt. vii. 179, No. 1037. 

Some interesting representations of 
Rome on coins are given in the The- 
saurus Morellianus : see Havercamp’s 
Index s. v. (ed. 1734). How soon Rome 
appeared as Pallas is disputed. 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 271 
ception of the Divine still lingered. ‘For a mortal to help a mortal,’ 
writes the elder Pliny, ‘is the essence of deity (Deus est mortali 
‘juvare mortalem), and this is the way to eternal glory. By this 
‘path it was the chiefs of Rome advanced: by this it is’—so he 
adds coming to his own time—‘ Vespasian, the greatest ruler of any 
‘age, is now proceeding with his children, in a heavenly course, 
And the oldest form of return- 
‘ing gratitude to benefactors, is that such men should be enrolled 


‘succouring the exhausted Empire. 
‘among the deities?.’ 


Thus in the consecration of the Emperors” two distinct elements Two ele- 
ments in 


were combined, the national faith in the Genius and the eastern the idea of 
adoration of power. The homage which one citizen might yield arc 


in servile adulation to a supreme lord, might be rendered by 
another to that which he looked upon as a spirit of the state. 
Such a combination of thoughts was present to the mind of the first 
emperors. Augustus during his lifetime would not allow any temple 
to be erected to himself alone, but only to ‘Rome and Augustus*’ 

Yet even so there were some men left in the republic who felt The con- 
that the first assumption of divine prerogatives by Cesar justified aries 
his death*, But Cesar had himself measured more accurately the iis 


’ Plin. Hist. Nat. ii. 7. The same 
kind of feeling runs through the frag- 
ment of Cicero’s treatise De consola- 


as at Mylasa: ὁ δῆμος αὐτοκράτορι Kai- 
capt θεοῦ υἱῷ Σεβαστῷ ἀρχιερεῖ μεγίστῳ 
καὶ θεᾷ Ῥώμῃ (Boeckh, Inscr. Gr. No. 


tione (ap. Lactant. Instit. i. 15) in 
which he proposes to render divine 
honours to Tullia: te omnium opti- 
mam doctissimamque, approbantibus 
diis immortalibus ipsis, in eorum ceetu 
locatam ad opinionem omnium mor- 
talium consecrabo. 

2 The subject of Apotheosis has been 
treated at length by J. D. Schoepf- 
lin in a special dissertation (De apo- 
theosi... Argentor. 1729). References 
to later literature are given in Pauly, 
Real-Encykl. s. v. 

Boissier discusses the Apotheosis of 
the Roman Emperors with special re- 
ference to that of Julius Cesar and 
Augustus in considerable detail (La 
Religion Romaine, i. 122—298). 

3 Inscriptions of this form are found 


2696); at Cyme in Mysia: ἐπὶ ἱερέως 
τᾶς Ῥώμας καὶ αὐτοκράτορος Kaleapos 
θέω ὑίω, θέω Σεβάστω.. Παλάμωνος (id. 
No. 3524); and at Athens: θεᾷ Ῥώμῃ 
καὶ Σεβαστῷ Καίσαρι (id. No. 478). 

Elsewhere the name of Augustus 
stands alone, as at Malta; ἀμφιπολεύ- 
σας θεῷ Αὐγούστῳ (id. No. 5754); and 
Tlium: αὐτοκράτορα Καίσαρα θεοῦ υἱόν, 
θεὸν Σεβαστόν... (id. No. 3604). Comp. 
id. No. 4474, ψήφισμα τῆς πόλεως πεμ- 
φθὲν θεῷ Αὐγούστῳ (Syria). See also 
Nos. 2087, 3285, 4238; and Appian, 
Bell. Civ. v. 132, καὶ ἦν ὁ Καῖσαρ ἐτῶν 
ἐς τότε ὀκτὼ καὶ εἴκοσι, καὶ αὐτὸν αἱ πό- 
λεις τοῖς σφετέροις θεοῖς συνίδρυον. 

4 Suet. Jul. Caesar, c. 76. Non enim 
honores modo nimios recepit...sed et 
ampliora etiam humano fastigio de- 


272 THE TWO EMPIRES: 


true spirit of his age, though he fell a victim to the few. No sooner 
was he dead than the Senate decreed to him ‘every honour divine 
‘at once and human!';’ and he was placed in the number of the 
gods not only ‘by the word of those who passed the decree, but also 
‘by the conviction of the people. A comet appeared for seven days 
‘in succession at the first celebration of the games which Augustus 
‘exhibited in his honour, and it was believed that it was the soul of 


‘Caesar admitted into heaven’.’ 


Worship of When the beginning was once made the descent was rapid’ 
A : ee 
alte Augustus resolutely refused to receive divine honours publicly at 


cerni sibi passus est: sedem auream in 
curia et pro tribunali, thensam et fer- 
culum Circensi, pompa, templa, aras, 
simulacra juxta deos, pulvinar, flami- 
nem, lupercos, appellationem mensis e 
suo nomine. Comp. 6. 88 in deorum 
numerum relatus est non ore modo 
decernentium sed et persuasione vulgi. 

1 Td. vc. 84. Comp. Dion Cass. xlvii. 
19. 
5 Id. cv. 88. The language of the 
poets is well known and not without 
deep significance, before it had become 
conventional. Comp. Ovid, Met. xv. 
840 ff., and Burmann’s note; Fasti 
iii. yor ff.; Lucan, Phars. i. 45 ff. 

The language used in an inscrip- 
tion at Ephesus in honour of Jul. 
Cesar (4. U. c. 7o6—7), which St John 
may have read, is worth quoting: 
...Tdiov Ιούλιον, Tatov υἱὸν Καίσαρα, 
τὸν ἀρχιερέα καὶ αὐτοκράτορα καὶ τὸ δεύ- 
τερον ὕπατον, τὸν ἀπὸ “Apews καὶ ᾿Αφρο- 
δείτης θεὸν ἐπιφανῇ καὶ κοινὸν τοῦ ἀν- 
θρωπίνου βίον σωτῆρα... Boeckh, Inscr. 
Gr. No. 2957. 

3 The rite was variously described 
by Latin writers as dicari celo, con- 
secrari, inter divos referri, in deorum 
numerum referri (Suet. ), divus appellari. 
Thus Eutropius says of Claudius: 
post mortem consecratus est divusque 
appellatus (vii. 13), and of Antoninus 
Pius: inter divos relatus est et merito 
consecratus (viii. 8). His notice of the 
consecration of Diocletian is remark- 
able: Contigit igitur ei, quod nulli 
post natos homines, ut cum privatus 
obisset inter divos tamen referretur. 


The Greek historians use the terms 
ἀποθέωσις (Tertull. Apol. 34) and ἐκ- 
θειάζειν. 

Herodian has given a detailed de- 
scription of the ceremony in connexion 
with the consecration of Septimius 
Severus (Herodian, iv. 2). The last 
sentence is worth quoting. The struc- 
ture on’ which the figure of the de- 
ceased was placed in order to be con- 
sumed is built, he says, ‘like a Pharos’ 
in diminishing stages. When the pile 
is lighted an eagle is let loose from 
the highest and smallest, ‘as from a 
‘battlement, to ascend with the fire 
‘to the sky. This is believed by the 
‘Romans to carry the soul of the Em- 
‘ peror from earth to heaven ; and from 
‘that time he is worshipped (θρησκεύε- 
“ταῦ with the rest of the gods.’ How- 
ever difticult it may be to believe that 
such an exhibition was made in the 
first age of the empire, Dion relates 
that this ceremony was performed at 
the burning of Augustus: ἡ μὲν [πυρὰ] 
ἀνηλίσκετο, ἀετὸς δέ τις ἐξ αὐτῆς ἀφεθεὶς 
ἀνίπτατο ὡς καὶ δὴ τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ ἐς 
τὸν οὐρανὸν ἀναφέρων (lvi. 42); and Sue- 
tonius relates that one was found, a 
man of pretorian rank, who swore 
that he saw his form (effigiem) ascend 
from the pyre to heaven: Oct. roo. 
Compare also Dion Cass. (Xiphil.) 
Ixxiv. 5 (an eagle rose from the pyre 
of Pertinax). 

The Apotheosis is represented on 
two important works of art, on the 
‘Tiberian Agate,’ and on the base of 
the column of Antoninus Pius. There 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 


Rome’ though he accepted the title (Augustus, Σεβαστός) which 
seemed to challenge them*; but at his death his feeling, at least, was 
sufficiently notorious to be made a ground of reproach*. In this 
respect the description which Ovid gives of the private worship 
which he paid to the members of the imperial family at his place 
of exile on the Euxine may probably serve as a type of the popular 
practice even during the emperor’s lifetime : 


‘Nec pietas ignota mea est: videt hospita tellus 
In nostra sacrum Cesaris esse domo. 

Stant pariter natusque pius, conjuxque sacerdos, 
Numina jam facto non leviora Deo... 

His ego do toties cum ture precantia verba 
Eoo quoties surgit ab orbe dies*.’ 

After the death of Augustus divine honours were solemnly de- 
creed and paid to him in the capital. The Senate decreed to him ‘a 
‘temple and divine rites (celestes relligiones)*.’ A sacred college 
(sodales Augustales) was established afterwards to provide for the 
due performance of the ceremonies connected with his worship®’. And 
the crowning rite of the ‘apotheosis’ sanctioned and defined the religi- 
ous honours which he had received and which were yet due to him’. 

In the provinces the enthusiasm of the devotees of the Empire 
was allowed free scope. The only limit placed upon it was that 
which has been already mentioned: Augustus required that the 
In obedience to this 


command temples were dedicated at Athens’ and Pola’ to Rome and 


name of Rome should be joined with his own. 


are good outlines on a small scale and 
descriptions of both in Millin’s Galerie 
Mythologique, pll. clxxix, clxxx, and 
also in Schoepflin, Tab. 1. A large 
engraving of the sculpture on the base 
of the column of Antoninus is given 
in the Museo Pio Clement. V., tav. 
xxix; and of the ‘Tiberian Agate’ in 
Montfaucon, L’ Antiquité expliquée, v. 
153. The Apotheosis of Faustina is 
represented on a bas-relief from the Arch 
of M. Aurelius. Parker, Phot. 1686. 
To these works may be added a 
group at Madrid symbolising the Apo- 
theosis of Claudius, in which an eagle 
is represented bearing the bust of the 
Emperor, who has a rayed crown 


W. J. 


and nimbus: Montfaucon, l. 6. p. τότ: 
Schoepflin, Tab. ii. 

1 Suet. Oct. 52. 

2 See below, p. 280, ἢ. 1. 

3 Tac. Ann. i. το. 

4 Ovid, Ep. ex Pont. iv. 9, 105 ff. 
Other passages of the Augustan poets 
are worth study: Virg. Ecl. i. 6 ff.; 
id. Georg. i. 24 ff.; ili. τό ff.; Hor. Od. 
iii. 25; iv. 5, 32. 

5 Tac. Ann.i.11; Dion Cass. lvi. 46. 

® Tac. Ann. i. 54; Hist. ii. 95. 

7 Dion Cass, lvi. 34, 42. 

8 Comp. Suet. Oct. 60. 
Inscr. Gr. No. 478. 

9 Stuart and Revett, Athens... iv. 
(ed. 1816). 


Boeckh, 


18 


273 


in the 
provinces. 


274 THE TWO EMPIRES: 


Augustus ; and Herod the Great placed two images to these kindred 
The 


cities of Asia Minor vied with one another in paying him the same 


powers in the temple which he built at his new Caesarea’. 


He was celebrated in temples at Pergamum’, at 
At Sparta he 


seenis to have had a temple alone like Julius Cesar which was seen 


kind of honour. 
Nicomedia, at Mylasa*, at Cyrene, in his lifetime. 
by Pausanias*. There were temples to him also at Cyzicus, Nysa, 
Apollonia in Pisidia, and Assos. The Augusteum at Ancyra has 
preserved the famous record of his achievements which was inscribed 
upon its walls®. The Augusteum at Alexandria was one of the most 
splendid buildings in the city®. In the West temples were raised to 
him at Tarragona in Spain’, at Narbonne, Vienne and Lyons in 


Gaul®. And Philo could say that the whole world decreed honours 


Later con- 
secrations. 


to Augustus equal to those paid to the Olympian gods®. 


It is unnecessary to trace at length the repetition of similar 


honours in the case of the following Emperors. 


The example once 


given was steadily followed with such variations as were due to the 


individual character of those who claimed or gave them. Tiberius 


imitated the reserve of Augustus. 


1 Jos. Ant. xv. 10 (13); id. Β. Jui. 
at (16). He placed in it a statue of 
Augustus ‘as large as that of Zeus at 
Olympia, of which it was an imitation, 
and another of Rome equal to that of 
Hero at Argos’ (Jos. loc. post.). 

Augustus, under the form of Jupiter 
and Livia, with the attributes of Rome, 
are represented on a famous cameo at 
Vienna: Millin, Galerie Mythologique, 
clxxxi. 676; compare id. clxxviii. 661. 

5 Tac. Ann. iv. 38, 55. 

3 Boeckh, Inscr. Gr. No. 2696. 

4 Pausan. iii. 11,4. This may have 
been erected after his death, like that 
at Nola: Suet. Z%b. 40. 

® On this Augusteum compare E. 
Guillaume, Revue Archéologique, 1871, 
pp. 347 ff. 

8 Philo, Leg. ad Cai. ii. p. 567. 

7 Tac, Ann. i. 78. Comp. Spartian. 
Traj. 6. 12. 

8 Suet. Claud. 2. Guillaume, Rev. 
Archéol. 1871, p. 348. Beurlier, Le 


He only allowed a single temple 


Culte Impérial, 19 ff. 

9 Philo, J. c. ii. pp. 567 f. 

At Tentyra he was called Ζεὺς ἐλευ- 
θέριος. Boeckh, Inser. Gr. No. 4715. 

Ephesus claimed to be νεωκόρος of 
the Augusti and of Artemis: Inscrr. 
Nos. 3, 7, 13, 15 from the Great Theatre. 
No. 15 from the site of the Temple, 
No. 12, 15 from the city and suburbs, 
in Wood’s Discoveries at Ephesus, 877. 

On the Temples of Augustus see 
Guillaume, l. 6. 

On Roman consecration coins he is 
styled generally Divus, but once on a 
coin of Gallienus Deus; and this title 
is found on provincial pieces (pEo 
avevsto): Eckhel, vi. 125. 

The following inscriptions are taken 
almost at random: at Perugia, ΝΎΜΙΧΙ 
AvGvsTI sacr. (Orelli, 608): at Verona, 
DEO avG...(id. 609): at Herculaneum, 
DIVO AVGVSTO AVGVSTALES (id. 610): at 
Fano, DIVO AVGYSTO...PIO PATRI DOMI- 
NORVM. 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 


to be erected to himself in connexion with the Senate in Asia; and 
It is said that Caius 
when he was warned that he had gone beyond the dignity of emperors 
and kings, immediately claimed the majesty of the gods, replacing 
by his own likeness the heads of famous statues, and offering him- 
self for the adoration of the citizens between the figures of Castor 
and Pollux?» A temple erected to Claudius at Camulodunum, to 
enforce, as it appeared, an endless dominion over the Britons, is given 
as one of the causes of the revolt of Boadicea*. 


refused to sanction a like honour in Spain". 


Nero after the con- 
spiracy of Piso went further than his predecessors and allowed a 
temple to be decreed to himself at Rome with the epithet ‘ Divus,’ 
though some at the time regarded the assumption of such a title as 
an omen of speedy death *. 

When the chiefs of the state were thus invested with a divine 
character, it was natural to extend celestial honours to the prin- 
cipal members of the imperial family. Accordingly wives and 
children of the Emperors received the stamp of divinity®. Caius 
consecrated his sister® and Trajan his father’. The license of such 
power was not exhausted, till Hadrian carried the profanation of 
worship to the furthest limit, and offered his unworthy favourite, 


Antinous, who was not even a Roman, as a new Bacchus or Apollo 


1 Tac. Ann. iv. 15, 55 ἴ.; 37 f. 

2 Suet. Cal. 22. 

* Tac. Ann. xiv. 31. Comp. id. Ann. 
xil. 69; xiii. ἡ. . 

4 Tac. Ann. xv. 74. Comp. Tert. 
Apol. 34. 

On contemporary coins he bears the 
titles of Zeus, Apollo and Hercules; 
and one coin in his honour is inscribed 
τῷ σωτῆρι τῆς οἰκουμένης : Eckhel, vi. 
278 £. 

‘s Thus the wives of Augustus (Livia), 
Vespasian (Domitilla), Trajan (Plo- 
tina), Hadrian (Sabina), Antoninus 
Pius (Faustina), M. Aurelius (Faustina 
Pia), Septimius Severus (Julia Au- 
gusta), Maximinus (Paulina), Valerian 
(Mariniana), received divine honours. 
See Schoepflin, pp. 54 ff. The first lady 
of the imperial family who was con- 
secrated was Drusilla, the sister of 


Caius: Suet. Calig. 24. 

Nero gave divine honours to his 
daughter Claudia Poppaa who died 
an infant: Tac. Ann. xv. 23. 

Those who had been consecrated 
were often represented under the form 
of the old deities, Livia, for example, 
as Juno, Julia as Ceres, Faustina as 
Cybele (Schoepflin, pp. go f.). 

In the Mus. Pio Clement. V., Tav. 
xxvi. there is a striking representa- 
tion of Hadrian in the character of 
Jupiter. 

6 Comp. Suet. Calig. 24. 

7 Plin. Paneg. το f. 

Beurlier has given, App. A. pp. 
325 ff., a full list of those to whom 
the title Divus (Diva) was applied. 
He reckons 56 up to Constantine 
(inclusive); and 22 afterwards up to 
Anastasius. 


18—2 


Two 
elements 
in the 
embodi- 
ment of 
Emperor- 
worship. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


or Pan, for the adoration of the world. ‘And all men,’ in the in- 


dignant words of Justin, ‘were eager to reverence him as a god 


1? 


through fear, though they knew who he was and whence he sprung’. 


These details, a few only out of many which are preserved on 
coins and inscriptions as well as in the scattered notices of historians, 
will indicate how deeply the belief in the superhuman character of 
the Emperor was inwrought into the popular mind in the first and 
second centuries, and how welcome it was to the mass of men, as 
offering them at least a definite object for worship, though the more 
thoughtful might shrink from some of the consequences which such 
an opinion carried with it. If we now endeavour to look at the 
belief more closely we shall see that as it was based upon two ideas 
originally, so it was manifested in two forms. We have to distinguish 
the position of the Emperor during his lifetime, and his position 
after death: the apotheosis and the inherent sacredness of the head 
of the state. These two elements are by no means necessarily con- 
nected. Many emperors like Caius and Nero and Domitian who had 
claimed and received while living divine honours were not reckoned 
among the gods after their death. The apotheosis was a deliberate 
act of the state performed through the Senate: the sacredness of the 
Emperor followed from the simple possession of power. Practically 
it was the latter which made a stumblingblock to the Christian. 
The recognition of the divinity of the Emperor found expression in 


Ιὰκχω and NEW πγθιω (Tarsus), 
OCTIAIOC ~MapkEAAOC 'Ιερεγε τοὺ 


1 Just. M. Apol. i. 29. Orig. 6. Cels. 
iii. 6. 36. 


Eckhel (Doctr. Numm. viii. 463) gives 
a list of members of the imperial 
family whose consecration is witnessed 
by coins, 48 in all, including 15 females. 
Compare also Schoepflin, pp. 15 —57. 

The divine worship paid to Anti- 
nous may serve as a striking example 
of popular fanaticism or profanity. 
Among the inscriptions on coins struck 
in his honour by Greek cities—‘none 
‘were struck at Rome or in Roman 
‘colonies’—are the following: anti- 
Nooc 1akxyoc (Adramyttium), New 


-ANTINOOY (Corinth), ANTINOON ΘΕῸΝ 


(Hierapolis, Nicopolis), H Tratpic an- 
TINOON θεον (Bithynium), TANI ἂν- 
TINOW (Arcadia?). One inscription 
may be added: anTiINOWw! CYNO@po- 
NWI TWN EN ἀΔιγύπτωι BEWN M. 
OYATHIOC ATTOAAWNIO’ προφητης 
(Gruter, p. 86. 1). 

These examples are taken from 
Eckhel, Doctr. Numm. vi. 528 ff. 

The worship of Antinous was still 
continued in Egypt in the time of 
Clement (Protr. iv. p. 14 P.). 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 277 


many of the acts of daily life. The apotheosis once accomplished 
only added one more to the list of deities who had no strong hold 
even upon the thoughts of the heathen. 

1. The essential divinity of the sovereign power was the ‘The wide 
main religious thought of the Empire, but at the same time the age 
ceremony of the apotheosis gave distinctness to the conception ὁ} 6055. 
of divinity in the living Emperors. The various emblems proper 
in the gods which were attributed to the deceased on works of 
art— the rayed crown, the pure wand, the nimbus, the sacred 
car, the eagle—appealed to the imagination and brought the idea 
of deity nearer to the earth. Moreover the apotheosis was not 
necessarily the reward of signal virtues. If it had been so the 
rite might have lessened the respect which was rendered to a 
vicious sovereign. But as it was the exceptions were not sufficient 
to disturb the belief that apotheosis was the natural issue of an 
ordinary reign'. The language of Pliny is undoubtedly rhetorical, 
but still there is some truth in his contemptuous explanation of the 
motives which had led to earlier apotheoses in order to extol the 
wisdom of Trajan. ‘Tiberius consecrated Augustus, but he did so in 
‘order that he might introduce the charge of treason: Nero conse- 
‘crated Claudius, but that he might mock [the ceremony], Titus 
‘consecrated Vespasian, and Domitian, Titus, but the former that he 
‘might appear to be the son, the latter that he might appear to be 
‘the brother of a god. You have raised your father to heaven not to 
‘inspire fear into the citizens, not to insult the deities, not to gain 
‘honour for yourself, but because you believe him to be a god.’ 
Such a belief however was not required even from the noblest 
Emperors. It is reckoned among the most distinguished merits of 
M. Aurelius that he dissembled or defended the profligacy of his 
colleague Verus, though it was most repulsive to him, and procured 
for him all the honours of consecration®. On the other hand it is 
said that the consecration of Marcus himself was something more 

1 Plin. Paneg. 11. preterquam consecrationis honore dig- 


2 Comp. Spart. Hadr. 27. Suet. natus...carpsit...edictis. 
Domit. 2 (Titum] defunctum...nullo 3 Capitol. M. Aur. 15. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


than a pageant. No one thought that he should be lamented as one 


who was lost. 


lent him for a time to men. 


Death had simply restored him to the gods who had 


Not to have his statue in the house, if 


a person’s position allowed or required it, was sacrilege ; and some 


believed that he continued to care for his people and revealed to 


them the future in dreams’. 


But such cases on either side were 


rare and the mocking words with which Vespasian recognised the 


progress of his fatal illness sufficiently describe the general feeling. 


“Woe is me: I suppose I am on the point of becoming ἃ god?.’ 


1 Capitol. M7. Aur. 18 parum sane 
fuit quod illi honores divinos omnis 
ztas omnis sexus omnis conditio ac 
dignitas dedit, nisi quod etiam sacri- 
legus judicatus est qui eius imaginem 
in sua domo non habuit, qui per for- 
tunam vel potuit habere vel debuit. 
Comp. id, Ant. P. 13. 

2 Suet. Vesp. 23. 

It is said by Eutropius (x. 15, 17) 
that Constantius and Jovian were con- 
secrated (inter divos relati); and the 
title Divus was given to the deceased 
Emperors in formal documents to the 
close of the Western Empire (Schoepf- 
lin, pp. 50 f.). The title was trans- 
ferred to later sovereigns even during 
their lifetime; and John of Salisbury, 
in a passage referred to by Schoepflin, 
remarks on the misuse of the word in 
his time: Suos quoque imperatores 
quos de more Romanus populus fide- 
liter jugulabat, deificavit fidelius inani 
solatio...eosque mentiebantur in sor- 
tem transiisse numinum ac si celo 
suo mundoque regendo, nisi tyrannis 
ascitis, omnipotentis non sufficiat ma- 
nus. Facti sunt ergo divi indigetes 
aut, ut aliis placet, heroes, quos nec 
etiam humana sorte dignos Romano- 
rum perfidia reputavit. Tractum est 
hine nomen quo principes virtutum 
titulis et vers fidei luce presignes se 
divos audeant nedum gaudeant appel- 
lari, veteri quidem consuetudine etiam 
in vitio et adversus fidem catholicam 
obtinente (Polyer. iii. 10; Migne, Pa- 
trol. Lat. οχοῖχ. 496). Charles the 
Great had already condemned the cus- 
tom. After reproving Constantine and 


Irene for their assumption of the title 
and for the use of the corresponding 
word divaliu in regard to their decrees, 
he says: Cesset igitur. cesset falsi 
nominis ambitio, destituatur antiqui 
erroris vestigium, facessat cace super- 
stitionis vocabulum, abdicatur proca- 
cis nominis supercilium, pellatur a 
fidelibus in divos transferendorum 
hominum gentile mendaciwn (Libr, 
Carol. cap. de imag. i. 4). 

The Consecration Coins form an 
interesting study. The mode in which 
the old idea is translated into a Bib- 
lical form in the consecration coin 
of Constantine is of singular interest. 
The head of the Emperor is covered 
with the usual veil, but on the reverse 
the eagle which before symbolised the 
removal of the soul above no longer 
appears. In its place the Emperor is 
represented in a chariot drawn by 
four horses with uplifted head and out- 
stretched hands, and from heaven the 
Divine Hand is stretched to raise the 
believer. 

In this connexion an earlier coin 
may be mentioned, which seems to ex- 
press simply the Christian thought of 
‘consecration.’ This is one struck by 
Gallienus in honour of his wife Salo- 
nina. It bears the empress seated 
with an olive-branch in her hand and 
the legend avevst.1N pace. The last 
two words can scarcely have a dif- 
ferent meaning from that which they 
bear on monuments. They shew al- 
most beyond question that Salonina 
was a Christian, and that the coin 
was struck by the Emperor in memory 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 279 


2. The apotheosis gave definiteness to the idea of the imperial Thegenius 
divinity by the consequent array of priests and sacrifices and tem- ne 
ples ; but it was, as has been said, the practical belief in the essential 
sacredness of the Emperor as such which forced the Christian into 
He could not, like his fellow- 


citizens, acknowledge the ‘Genius’ of the Emperor: he could not give 


direct antagonism with the state’. 


divine honour to the Emperor himself. The Genius or Fortune of the 
Emperor symbolised the spiritual energy which through him was 
supposed to direct the whole system of the commonwealth. To swear 
by this was to recognise the reality of a power which the Christian 
either denied to exist or held to be malignant’. And it was equally 
impossible for him to attribute to a man any of the prerogatives which 
he held to belong to God. ‘We render honour to the Emperor,’ writes 
Tertullian*, ‘in such a way as is lawful for us and expedient for 
‘him, as to a man who stands next to God, and who has obtained 
‘whatever he is from God, and is less than God only... And so we offer 
‘sacrifices for the safety of the Emperor, but to our God and his, and, 


‘as God has enjoined, with simple prayer.’ And however extravagant 


of his wife after her death. Comp. 
King, Early Christian Numismatics, 
pp- 44 ff.; and on the whole subject of 
Consecration Coins Eckhel, Doctr. 
Numm. viii. 456 ff. 

1 The representation of the Genius 
is found sparingly on the coins of the 
early Emperors: ¢.g. GENIO AUGUSTI 
(Nero: Eckhel, vi. 272); GENIO vr. . 
(Augustus: id. vi. 97 1); GENIUS P. R. 
(Vitellius: id. vi. 317). Towards the 
elose of the third century the Genius 
appears much more commonly and in 
different forms. It is significantly cha- 
racteristic of the reign of Diocletian. 
The following types of inscription are 
given in Bandurius: GENIUS AUGUSTI, 
G. AUGUSTORUM, G. AUGG. ET COSS., G. 
CHSARIS, and GENIUS EXERCITUS, G. 
EXERCITUS ILLYRICIANI, G. ILLYRICI, G. 
IMPERATORIS, G. POPULI RomaNI. The 
GENIUS AUGUSTI, G. IMPERATORIS, G. 
POPULI ROMANI appears on coins of 
Constantine. The only later example 
which I have observed is on a coin of 


Julian: GENIO ANTIOCHENI. 

Inscriptions in honour of the Genius 
of a particular place, or society or 
person are very frequent. Among the 
Roman inscriptions Mommsen gives 
examples of dedications: GENIO CEN- 
TURIZ, G. TURMH, G. SANCTO CASTRO- 
RUM, G. HORREORUM, 6. DECURIZ, «. 
ExeERcitus, &c. (Inserr. Latt. vi. 1, 
208 ff.). In Britain inscriptions are 
found GENIO LOCI, G. CENTURIZ, 6. 
COHORTIS, G. VALLI, G. TERRE BRITAN- 
Nice, &c, id. vii. The corresponding 
phrases ΤΎΧΗ ceBactoy and τύχη 
πόλεως are found on Greek coins: 
Eckhel, iv. 60; ii. 455. It would be of 
deep interest to compare the ideas of 
TYXH and GENIUS. 

There is an impressive figure of the 
Genius of Augustus in the Mus. Pio 
Clement. iii. Tav. 11. 

2 Orig. c. Cels. viii. 65. 

5. Tert. ad Scap.z. Comp. Theoph. 
ad Autol. i. 11. 


280 


Essential- 
ly opposed 
to the idea 
of Chris- 
tianity. 


THE TWO EMPIRES: 


the pretensions may appear which Tertullian here sets aside they 
The 


very title ‘Augustus’ was rightly felt from the first to separate him 


were a necessary consequence of the conception of the Empire. 


to whom it was assigned from other men, and, so to speak, to conse- 
crate him while still on earth. So Ovid rightly contrasts the name 
with the most glorious titles which the heroes of Roman history had 


won, and adds : 


‘Sed tamen humanis celebrantur honoribus omnes: 
Hic socium summo cum Jove nomen habet. 
Sancta vocant augusta patres: augusta vocantur 

Templa, sacerdotum rite dicata manu~.’ 


If the Empire was one and had one life, if the centre of life was in 
the sovereign, if the many deities of polytheism were supposed to 
exercise local and circumscribed authority it is evident that the 
Emperor alone could offer to all his subjects a common object for 
adoration. In him all that affected their outward well-being was 
visibly gathered up. No member of the popular Pantheon presented 
a similar point of convergence for hope. If unity could be gained 
under polytheism it could exist only through an actual, temporal 
head. And this unity it was, constructed artificially and set forth 
for the acceptance of men in the person of an Emperor, that the 
Roman system expressed. 

In such a view of humanity the Christian found the complete 
antithesis to that which had been revealed to him. He held indeed 
most firmly the unity of humanity, but this was assured to him in 
the Incarnation. Unity resting on that which is outward seemed to 
He reached forward to 
another order for the resolution of all the discords of life. He could 


him necessarily to be partial and worthless. 


not acknowledge in the Emperor the centre of that larger being 
which he had found in all its fulness in Christ. He could not invoke 


the Genius—-the demon—the spiritual essence of a power which 


1 On the title compare Eckhel, Doctr. 
Nwnm. viii. pp. 355 ff. The words of 
Dion Cassius (liii. 16) state the case 
plainly: Αὔγουστος ὡς καὶ πλεῖον ἢ 
κατὰ ἀνθρώπους ὧν ἐπεκλήθη, πάντα γὰρ 
τὰ ἐντιμότατα καὶ τὰ ἱερώτατα αὔγουστα 
προσαγορεύεται' ἐξ οὗπερ καὶ Σεβαστὸν 


αὐτὸν καὶ ἑλληνίζοντές πως ὥσπερ τινὰ 
σεπτὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ σεβάζεσθαι προσεῖπον. 

2 Ovid, Fasti, i.607 ff. Comp. Suet. 
Octav. 7; Florus, ii. 34. On the Ephe- 
sine inscriptions φιλοσέβαστος occurs 
not unfrequently as a regular official 
epithet. 


THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD. 281 


stood forth as a rival of that to which he was devoted. He could 
not admit any of the prerogatives of absolute and irresponsible 
power in the person of one who represented the principles and 
authority of the visible order. Thus the opposition of Christianity 
and Imperialism was complete and irrevocable. The two Empires, 
when regarded in their principles, were seen to be utterly irrecon- 


cilable. 


3. One practical consequence of momentous importance followed a effect 
of the 
from the concentration of all the dignity of the state in the single law of 


supreme head. An offence against the Emperor was not an offence Τθαϑοῖο 
against a man but against the commonwealth. Pliny, as we have 
seen, does not scruple to affirm that Tiberius procured the consecra- 
tion of Augustus, that he might introduce the law of treason 
(majestas, ἀσέβεια). The statement may be an exaggeration, but it 
is evident that the two ideas closely correspond; and no one can 
study the early history of the Empire without feeling that the novel 
conception of the law of treason expresses in a most ‘striking form 
the change which had passed over the constitution of the state. 
Even to a Roman this application of an old law—based on the 
exceptional position of the Emperor—often seemed to be intolerably 
vexatious. To shew that a man had been condemned for treason 
was held in the next reign to be, as Tacitus implies, a presumption 
of his innocence’. On the other hand Pliny remarks that it was a 
crime which a tyrant could plead against those who were free from 
every other’, At one time the sale of a statue of the reigning Em- 
peror was supposed to furnish ground for an impeachment: at another 
the conversion of such a statue into vessels for ordinary use. It was 
treason to speak evil of Augustus: it was treason to call Cassius the 
last of the Romans*. Caius, it is said, put men to death because 


they expressed a poor opinion of his shows, or never swore by his 


2 4 
genius*. 
1 Tac. Hist. i. 77. 3 Tac. Ann.i. 73; ii. 50; iii. 70; iv. 34. 
2 Plin. Paneg. 42, Comp. Tac. Ann. 4 Suet. Calig.27. Comp. id. Claud. 


iii. 38. Il. 


282 


THE TWO EMPIRES. 


In such a state of things it will be evident how liable Christians 
would become to the charge of treason, and how impossible it was 
for them to render the homage to the Emperor which was the test 
of loyalty. They could not offer sacrifices for his safety: they could 
not invoke his genius: they could not give him titles which seemed 
to trench upon the majesty of the one Lord. And while this was 
so it was vain for them to appeal to their secret prayers for his 
well-being : to pledge their wishes for his safety: to call him ‘a man 
second to God’.’ They did not dissemble that they owed supreme alle- 
giance to another Master: that they waited for the establishment 
of another Kingdom: that they must fix for themselves the limits of 
their obedience. They were forced to stand as witnesses to the 
reality of an unseen world. They felt, it may have been indistinctly 
as yet, that in a firm hold on that they had a pledge of a nobler 
freedom than had ever been realised among men: that the belief in 
God, as mace known to them in Christ, was the one safeguard against 
utter slavery. And because they believed in His Kingdom as more 
sure than all things, they knew that the faith which was committed 
to them was for all men, and not for Jew or Greek or Roman: they 
knew that it covered the whole area of life and could not leave any 
fragment of it to be occupied by a strange power: they knew that 
their work was not one of silence only but of might: and in that 


knowledge they were armed for the final conflict for life or death. 


1 Tert. Apol. 28 ff., 32. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


ὁ θεὸς ἀγάπη ECTIN. 


ὃ ἦν ἀπ ἀρχῆς...περὶ τοῦ λόγου τῆς ζωῆς. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


I. Humanity created for union with God. 
Conception of the normal progress towards union, apart from sin. 


II. The subject belongs to a late period in the history of Theology 
prominent in scholastic discussions. 
Illustrations of its treatment 

Rupert of Deutz. 
Movements in the xuth Cent. 
Alexander of Hales. 
Albert the Great. 
Thomas Aquinas. 
Bonaventura, 
Duns Scotus. 
Gabriel Biel. 
John Wessel. 
Picus of Mirandola. 
Naclantus. 
Andr. Osiander. 
Servetus. 
F. Socinus. 
Calvin. 
Later Calvinists. 


Ili. Right mode of approaching the question. 
Two main questions 


1. The relation of man to God and the world. 
2. The consequent aspect of the Incarnation. 
1. Man as created. 


i. In the image of God. 
(a) The individual. 
Need of Mediation. 
(b) The race. 
Need of unity, 
Relation of Christ to the Church. 


ii. The representative of Creation. 
Differentiation the law of progress. 
Reunion. 


2. The necessities of man and men independent of the Fall. 
Consummation answers to Creation. 

The Gospel of Creation not an arbitrary speculation. 

The general silence of Scripture natural. 

The truth practical, and helpful for our needs. 


Condi- 
tions 
under 
which the 
inquiry is 
permis- 
sible. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


N attempting to speak of such a mystery as the Gospel of Creation, 
that is of the promise of the Incarnation which was included in 
the Creation of man, it is evident that we have need of watchful and 
reverent care lest we should strive to go beyond the limits which 
bound the proper field of our powers. It is necessary also that we 
should guard ourselves against the danger of using human language, 
not only (as we must do) to represent as clearly as possible our con- 
ceptions of the divine, but as the legitimate foundation for secondary 
conclusions. If however we do devoutly recognise that in such 
speculations we are entering on holy ground ; if we steadily refuse to 
admit deductions as absolute which are derived from the conditions 
under which we apprehend the Truth made known to us; then it is 
well for us to look for a time towards the loftiest heights and the 
deepest foundations of faith. If we essay something without ‘ pre- 
‘sumption and in submission to the judgment of the Church’—to 
borrow words spoken on the subject three hundred years ago—‘ and 
‘supported by the light of the divine word give expression to our 
‘thoughts humbly to the best of our power with stammering lips, 
‘not only do we not offend God, but we do Him reverence, and not 
‘unfrequently profit the weaker members of the Church.’ 
1 Et si Divine mentis arcana in nostris, mirum non est si nobis, dum 
patria pertingemus illustrius, ubi in hic agimus, magna sunt ex parte recon- 
lumine glorie lumen nostre videbimus dita; attamen cum sine presumptione 


felicitatis; immo cum cogitationes Dei subque censura, prout facimus, sacro- 
longe diverse sunt a cogitationibus sancte ecclesie aliquid attentamus et 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 287 


In this spirit then we must attempt to define our meaning when Concep- 
we express the belief that the true Protevangelium is to be found in Sena 


the revelation of Creation, or in other words that the Incarnation was ares 


independent of the Fall. All our present ideas of human life neces- towards 
sarily involve thoughts of pain and suffering and weakness. Such = ae 
thoughts however are wholly excluded from the conception of that 
manhood which we regard as predestined in the eternal and absolute 
counsel of God for union with the Word, or (to look at it fromthe 
other side) as answering to Him of whom it was, in some sense 
which we cannot strictly define, the image, related as a copy to the 
archetype. In order to gain, however imperfectly and transiently, 
this conception, we endeavour to present to ourselves humanity 
made in God’s image and advancing in harmonious cooperation with 
His Grace towards His likeness. We look upon men and man, upon 
the race as well as upon the individual, as far as we can, growing per- 
fect as God is perfect, holy as God is holy. We follow this progress 
to its consummation; and then having so gained a conception of man- 
hood, answering to what is made known of the divine idea of man, 
we go on to say that it is most consonant to what God has revealed 
to believe that it was His pleasure that humanity, so consummated in 
its proper development in many parts, should find its true personality 
by union with His Son. According to this view man’s self-will by 
which he fell was not the occasion of the supreme manifestation of 

‘the love of God in ‘the taking of manhood into God.’ That was 
the end of Creation from the beginning. The Fall, and here lies the 
greatest mystery of divine love, did not frustrate this end, which it 
might seem to have made unattainable consistently with that truth 
and justice which define omnipotence. 


There is no question on any side that everything of suffering and All idea of 


. humilia- 
shame connected with the Incarnation was due to the Fall: there is tion ex- 
no question that in our imagination the voluntary endurance of these Hs oe 


by the Son of God makes His love appear greater. But indeed ἃ union. 


luce Divini verbi suffulti illud pro veneramur et ecclesia imbecillioribus 
nostro captu humiliter balbutimus, membris non raro proficimus (Naclan- 
non solum Deum non offendimus sed tus, Opera, p. 37). 


The idea 
of a Gospel 
of Crea- 
tion not 
discussed 
in the first 
ages of the 
Church. 


Stages in 
the history 
of the 
question. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


nothing finite can appreciably alter the love manifested in the Incar- 
nation which is essentially infinite ; and it can be fairly maintained 
that we are led by Scripture to regard the circumstances of the 
Incarnation as separable from the idea of the Incarnation, and to 
hold that the circumstances of the Incarnation were due to sin, while 
the idea of the Incarnation was due to the primal and absolute 
purpose of love foreshadowed in Creation, apart from sin which was 


contingent. 


II. 


The subject as it is thus presented belongs properly to the later 
ages of the Church. It may perhaps be truly said that the thought 
of an Incarnation independent of the Fall harmonizes with the 
general tenor of Greek Theology’. Some patristic phrases seem to 
imply that the thought was distinctly realised here and there, and 
perhaps discussed. But the question was not formally raised, at 
least not so as to come into prominence, till the x1th or xmth century. 
The circumstances of the primitive Church adequately explain this 
silence on a point of speculation, which was not suggested and was 
even put out of sight by the work to be done in the first ages. The 
intensity of the conflict with heathenism was a necessary hindrance 
to the realisation of the unity of humanity; and physical research 
had not within its own sphere forced the thought of such a unity 
upon men’s minds. Under such circumstances it was natural that 
Christian teachers should concentrate their efforts upon bringing out 
the truth of the redemption of a Church from fallen humanity 
rather than enter upon the theoretical investigation of the original 
relation of man and humanity to God. 

There is indeed a divine order in the progressive apprehension of 
the fulness of truth by the Christian consciousness. So the first work 
of conquest, the conquest of the old world, was accomplished by the 
Church in due time. And when the controversies of the fourth century 
were decided, a period of mainly traditional theology followed during 


1 See below, pp. 319 ff. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


the conquest of the northern nations (590—r1050), Then at length 
a fresh energy of life was quickened in the West in the eleventh 
century, and scholars began to venture on independent lines of 
thought in many directions. Among other subjects the absolute 
idea and motive of the Incarnation appears then first to have re- 
ceived attention. The topic is handled by Rupert of Deutz (+1135), 
but in such a way as to indicate that he is dealing with it tenta- 
tively and without having either received or gained a firm and 
consistent opinion on the subject’. 

From the beginning of the thirteenth century the question ‘ whe- 
‘ther Christ would have been incarnate if Adam had not sinned,’ 
became one of the recognised questions of the schools. In the period 
of the Reformation it was debated by representatives of the chief 
parties of Christendom ; and now again in quite recent times, after 
falling out of sight, the subject has been, and is likely to be, keenly 
discussed. 

The course of the controversy, the arguments used on the 
different sides, the grounds of decision and of doubt alleged by the 
great teachers, afford a most instructive study in theology, the more 
instructive perhaps because the subject itself is not complicated with 
considerations of orthodoxy, for it has been generally allowed that 
both decisions on the point in dispute are allowable. If it were 
only for the purpose of examining in one detail the method of the 
‘schoolmen, it would be well worth while to consider what they have 
written upon a subject not uncongenial to their spirit, and one in 
which they are brought near to ourselves. Many of the arguments 
which they use appear to us frivolous and pointless. It requires a 
serious effort to enter into them with a sympathetic intelligence. 
But the effort is worth making. Conclusions which rest upon 
arbitrary assumptions as to the symmetries of things witness in an 


1 In the attempt to trace the outline Thomassin (L.), De dogmatibus : ; De 
of the history of the doctrine, I have Incarn. ii. 17, 7ff. There is a slight 
derived great assistance from the re- review of the history in Dorner’s Doc- 
ferences in Gerhard (Joh.) Uberior ex- _trine of the Person of Christ, ii. vol. τ. 
plicatio, loc. rv. cap. vii.§§142 ff.; Quen- pp. 361 ff. (Eng. Transl.). 
stedt (J. A.) Syst. Theol. 11. 109 ff. ; ; 


w. J. 19 


289 


The sub- 


ject offers 


an inte- 
resting 
study of 
this scho- 
lastic 
method. 


TuPERT ΟΕ 
Deutz. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


imperfect fashion to a deep sense of a divine order in creation ; and 
we do injustice to those who draw them if we allow even the 
greatest errors of expression and form to blind us to the nobility of 


the conception which they embody most inadequately, 


The first writer however whom we have to notice, RupPERYT ΟΕ 
Deutz, was not either in spirit or in form a schoolman. The con- 
temporary of Bernard of Clairvaux, he gave himself even more com- 
pletely than Bernard to the study of Holy Scripture and looked to 
the immediate guidance of the Spirit for the understanding of it. His 
In 1120 he was called to be Abbat 


His numerous works rest almost 


early years were spent at Liége. 
of Deutz, and died there in 1135. 
exclusively on interpretations of books or passages of the Bible; and 
even where he gives way to a license of allegorising he preserves 
and enforces the conviction that the Word of God is still directly 
addressed to man through the writings of prophets and apostles. 

It is very startling that the main argument of Rupert in favour 
of the absolute divine purpose of the Incarnation is based upon a 
false reading of the Latin text of Hebr. ii. ro. This he quotes with 
the passive conswmmari for conswmmare’, and thus obtains the sense 
that it was fitting that He for Whom were all things and through 
Whom were all things—even the Son of God—in bringing many sons 
to glory, should Himself be made perfect through suffering. ‘The 
‘first thing to inquire here,’ he goes on to say, ‘is whether the Son 
‘of God spoken of in this place would have become man or not even 
‘if sin, for which we all die, had not intervened.’ All are agreed, 
he continues, that in that case He would not have become a mortal 
man. ‘The question is whether God would have become man as the 


‘Head and King of all as He now is, and whether this was in some 


1 Decebat enim eum propter quem 
omnia et per quem omnia, qui multos 
filios in gloriam adduxerat, auctorem 
salutis eorum per passionem consum- 
mari. So also Ambrose, Rufinus, 
Sedulius, Vigilius Tapsensis, Comp. 
Sabatier ad loc. Rupert, Comm. in 


Matt. Lib. xiii. p. 696 (Migne, Patrol. 
Lat. elxviii. p. 1628). The Comment- 
ary is referred to the year 1126. In 
the treatise De glorif. Trin. i. § 6 the 
text gives consummare, but the line of 
argument requires consummari. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


‘sense necessary for the human race.’ The elect saints would cer- 
tainly have been born, if man had not fallen, as Augustine shews 
(De cw. Det xiv. 23), in accordance with the blessing at creation 
(Gen. i. 28 Increase and multiply). It is then absurd to suppose that 
sin, which was not necessary for their birth, was necessary for the 
Head and King of all elect angels and men, in order that He should 
become man, who was destined to have ‘the delights of His love with 
‘the sons of men’ (Prov. viii. 31)...‘It is marvellous,’ he concludes, 
‘and worthy of devout gratitude (adoratione) that sin coming in the 
‘way did not make of none effect (evacwarit) that purpose of so 
‘great love,’ in which God had purposed that the Word of God 
should take delight with the sons of man, by having a form limited 
according to human nature in the midst of angels and men; ‘nay, 
‘then came to pass the saying... Where sin abounded grace did much 
‘more abound (Rom. v. 20)...seeing that the Son became without sin 
“such as we had become for sin; that is, not only did He not shrink 
‘from our nature which He had purposed to assume, but for our 
‘sake descended even unto death...as the Apostle says, For it became 
‘ Him...to be made perfect through suffering (Hebr. ii. 10).’ 

In another work written not long after Rupert, in answer to the 
opinion that man was created to fill up the gap made in the angelic 
orders by a Fall, says’: ‘It is more right to say not that man was 
‘made for the sake of angels, but that the angels, as every thing 
‘else, were made for a particular man, according-to the witness of the 
‘Apostle: For at became Him [i.e. Christ, the Son of man] for Whom 
are all things and through Whom are all things. And after referring 
to John i. 3 f. (with the Latin reading quod factum est in ipso vita 
erat) he goes on to Prov. viii. 31, and asks ‘ what else is this than if 
‘he had said: “Before God made anything from the beginning, and 
“when He was making this or that, this was His purpose that I the 
“Word of God, the Word God (verbum Deus) should become flesh, 
“and dwell among men with great love and great humility, which 
“are true delights.” ‘Therefore we say that it is not so likely that 
‘man was made to fill up the number of angels as that both angels 

1 De glorif. Trin. iii. §§ 20 f. (Migne, Patrol. Lat. clzix. pp. 71 ff.). 
19--2 


201 


292 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


‘and men were made for the sake of one man Jesus Christ ; that as 
‘He, one and the same, was both God, born of God, and destined to 
‘be born man, He might have a family prepared on both sides, of 
‘angels and of men, and might Himself, God and man, rise aloft Lord 
‘and Creator of angels, Lord and Creator and Saviour of the saints, 
‘Lord, I say, among them as in His own house, King in His own 
‘nation, God in His own majesty, because, as has been already said, 
‘all things are both for Him and through Him.’ 

Thus Rupert regards the Incarnation as essentially independent 
of Sin and the Fall, and still he argues that the Fall did in fact 
redound to this glory of Christ. The humiliation of love which it 
called out was followed by a more exceeding glory (Phil. ii. 9). And 
thus, he says’, when the trembling sinner looks to Christ in His 
majesty, he may fancy that he hears Him answer: ‘I should not 
‘have been such as I am and so great, except for thy sake for 
‘the sins of the human race (causa tui propter peccata generis 
‘humant).... We see, the Apostle says, the Lord Jesus Christ for 
‘suffering crowned with glory and honour (Hebr. ii. 9). Therefore 
‘the godless and the wicked were the cause that He is crowned and 
‘seated at the right hand of God, crowned with the glory of the 
‘kingdom, with the honour of the priesthood. He therefore owes 
‘much to the godless who are turned through faith in Him to godli- 
‘ness: He owes much to enemies who through Him were reconciled 
‘to God.’ 

In a later work the same thought is expressed if possible in a 
bolder paradox. ‘ Let believing sinners, penitent sinners,’ he writes, 
‘reply in answer to the accusations of their Judge: “If we owe much 
“to Thee, O God Christ, because Thou wast made man, yet Thou on 
“the other hand owest much to us, O man Christ, because for us 
“Thou wert taken into God. For unless we had been sinners there 
“would have been no reason why Thou shouldest have been taken 
“into God.”’ The penitent sinner must look therefore, he argues, 
not at Christ’s sufferings only, but at His exaltation. ‘Unless the 


1 Comm. in Matt. xii. 697 (Migne, 3. De medit. mortis ii. p. 249 (Migne, 
Patrol. Lat. elxviii.). Patrol. Lat. clxx. p. 387). 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 293 


‘slaves had sinned the nature of the slave would not have been taken 
‘into the Lord God. For the Lord did not receive more outrages 
‘for the rebellious and wicked slaves than glory for the same.’ 

The two views thus expressed are inconsistent only in appearance. 
The Incarnation as absolute in idea is in some way contrasted with 
the Incarnation as conditioned by sin in fact. Christ by taking 
upon Himself man’s nature, when man had fallen, and bearing all the 
consequences of sin was more highly exalted, it is argued, than if the 
union of man and God had been otherwise made. The circumstances 
of the Incarnation have actually made the issue of it more glorious 
for Christ. The thoughts are evidently written down without care- 
ful guarding against misconception. New lights flash across the 
thinker’s soul and he hardly pauses till they have settled into the 
calm of the perfect day. 


It is difficult to trace the history of the question during the cen- The 
tury which followed the death of Rupert. It does not appear to have eae 
been discussed in the school of St Victor at Paris, where it might “S™ 
have been expected to attract attention. The teaching of Hugh of 
St Victor (7 1141) and Richard of St Victor ({ 1173) seems to 
connect the Incarnation exclusively with the Fall’. Meanwhile the 
system of scholastic theology was being reduced to a definite shape. 
Anselm ({ 1109) had proved in controversy and in original specula- 
tion the power of a logical method. Attention was again turned to 
Boetius’ direct translation of the Organon of Aristotle which stimu- 
lated and guided independent thought. The translation of the 
treatise of John of Damascus, On the Orthodox Faith into Latin 
(c. 1146), gave a model to the West for the construction of a general 
view of Christian doctrine. Several ‘ Systems’ (Summa Theologic) 
were compiled, one by our own Stephen Langton (c. 1205), and 
Books of Sentences. But supreme among these by its masterly com- 

' Eeelesia fidelium cum omni fiducia ac tantum meruit habere redemptorem. 
canat: O certe necessarium Ade pec- Ric. aS. Victore, de Verbo Inc. 8(Migne, 


catum et nostrum quod morte Christi Patrol. Lat. cxcvi. p. 1003). 
deletum est. O felix culpa que talem 


294 


Outline of 
the Books 
of Sen- 
tences of 
PETER 
Louparp. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


pleteness of form and lasting influence was the great work of Peter 
Lombard of Novara, the scholar of Abélard, and afterwards Bishop 
of Paris (t 1164), Sententiarum Libri iv., which practically deter- 
mined once for all the outlines of the various medieval systems of 
doctrine, and through them has influenced the direction of the cur- 
rents of thought over to the present day. 

The first book of the Sentences treats of the questions which 
concern the mystery of the Godhead: of the Trinity and Unity: of 
the Divine Persons: of the Divine attributes and will. 

The second book treats of finite being: of Creation and crea- 
tures: of angels: of the work of the six days: of the fall: of free- 
will and grace: of sin and sins. 

The third book treats of the Incarnation: of the Human nature 
of Christ and its relation to the Divine: of the nature and necessity 
of redemption: of Faith, Hope and Charity: of the four cardinal 
virtues (Justice, Courage, Prudence, Temperance): of the seven 
gifts of the Holy Spirit: of the ten commandments. 

The fourth book treats of the Sacraments and Eschatology: of 
Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, 
Orders, Marriage: of the Resurrection, the Last Judgment, the 
Future State’. 


The question of the absolute motive of the Incarnation is not 
raised by Peter Lombard, but when it appears next it has evidently 
been already made the subject of careful inquiry from many sides. 
About the year 1243 Innocent IV. commissioned Alexander of Hales 
(Alexander Alensis, Alesius), a Franciscan, who had won for himself 
the titles of ‘Fountain of Life’ and ‘ Doctor arrefragabilis,’ to com- 


pose ‘a Body of Theology’.’ This he did on the general lines of the 


1 The history of scholasticism is and Duns Scotus, as the representa- 


commonly divided into three periods. 
The first extends to about 1250; the 
second to about 1330; the third to the 
close of the 15th century. I have 
taken ALEXANDER oF Haves as the re- 
presentative of the first: ALBERT THE 
Great, THomas Aquinas, BonAVENTURA, 


tives of the second, the heroic age of 
the schoolmen; and Gasrieu Brez, as 
the representative of the last age, the 
age of the decline and dissolution of 
their system. 

_ 5 Alexander cannot have been edu- 
cated as is universally stated in the 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


Sentences in four parts; and the work, which was approved by a 
Bull of Alexander IV. in accordance with the solemn judgment of 
seventy Theologians, is a marvellous monument of learning and 
thought. 

"The third Part treats of the Incarnation. 
discussed are ‘On the Necessity of the Incarnation’ and ‘On the 


‘fitness (convenrentia) of the Incarnation.’ 


The first two questions 


The last topic (membrum) 
which is considered under the second head (and the twelve preceding 
topics shew singular fertility and subtlety of thought), is ‘ whether if 
‘human nature had not fallen through sin there would still have 
‘been reason and fitness for the Incarnation of Christ? (an st humana 
‘natura per peccatum lapsa non esset adhuc fuisset ratio et conve- 
‘nientia ad Christi Incarnationem ?)’ 

This Alexander affirms (sine prejudicio concedendum est); and 
he brings forward four reasons in support of his view : 

1. The highest good is necessarily diffusive and perfectly diffused. 
It must therefore be extended to the creature; for otherwise we 
And this diffusion would 
not be complete unless He who is the highest good were united with 


could imagine a more complete diffusion. 


the creature, that is, with man the representative of creation. 

2. All blessedness is in God; and the creature is capable of 
blessedness in all its parts). A man therefore, a rational creature 
made up of body and mind, is capable of being blessed in sense as 
well as in understanding. 

He must then be blessed in God in both (secundum sensum et 
secundum intellectum). 

But he cannot be blessed in God in Himself as far as sense. 
Therefore God must assume a corporeal nature to bring this blessed- 


ness to him, and, if so, a human nature. 


Cistercian [ποὺ Franciscan] Abbey of 
Hailes in Gloucestershire. This was 
not founded till 1246, the year after 
his death. Rudder, in his History of 
Gloucestershire, suggests that he was 
educated at Hales Owen in Shropshire, 
which was commonly called Hales, 
where there was a convent of Premon- 


stratensian Monks founded in the reign 
of John. It is said that Alexander 
reckoned among his pupils Bonaven- 
tura and Thomas Aquinas. Zealous 
Dominicans deny that Thomas heard 
him, but the tradition is supported 
with strong evidence by Wadding, An- 
nales, iii. pp. 133 ff. 


95 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


3. There are three Persons in unity of substance (in the Holy 
Trinity): there are three persons in three substances (as three angels 
or three men). 

Hence to complete the possible combinations, that there may be 
perfection in the universe, we conclude that there will be three 
substances in one Person. 

This can only be realised by the union of the divine nature with 
the twofold human nature (spiritual and corporeal). 

4. We find unity of Nature in three Persons (in God) ; we find 
also unity of Person in two natures (in man): if this plurality of 
natures belongs to the perfection of persons it must be possible for 
God. We must suppose therefore that one divine Person (and if so 
the Son) was destined absolutely to be united in time to human 


nature’. 


1 Alex. Alensis Summe@ Theol. Pars 
ili., Quest. iii., Membr. xiii...... dicit 
Dionysius Bonum est diffusivum sui 
e88e...... Ergo si summum bonum exist- 
ente creatura non se diffundit in crea- 
turam, adhue erat cogitare majorem 
diffusionem...... Sed hee diffusio non 
potest intelligi summa nisi ipse [Deus] 
uniatur creature; ergo convenit quod 
Deus uniatur creature, et maxime 
humane...Ergo posito quod ipsa non 
esset lapsa, adhuc ei uniretur sum- 
mum bonum. 

Ire, non est beatitudo nisi in Deo; 
et creatura rationalis tota est beatifi- 
cabilis...ergo et secundum sensum et 
secundum intellectum ; ergo oporteret 
quod in Deo beatificaretur quantum 
ad utrumque...Sed in Deo secundum 
se considerando et in propria natura 
non potest beatificari sensus sed solum 
intellectus...Si ergo totus homo debet 
beatificari in Deo, oportet Deum esse 
corporalem et sensibilem. Sed non 
est conveniens, ut assumat quamlibet 
corporalem naturam, sed solum huma- 
nam, ut dictum est. 

Irem, contingit intelligere tres per- 
sonas in unitate substantia; et ex 
opposito tres substantias in unitate 
person# ; et inter hwe duo tres per- 
sonas in tribus substantiis. Si ergo 
unum extremorum est in rerum natura 


...et medium...contingit ponere ter- 
tium, videlicet unam personam in 
tribus substantiis; sed hoc non po- 
test fieri nisi per unionem divine 
nature ad humanam, quia in nulla 
alia creatura est ponere duas substan- 
tias quam in homine, scilicet spiritu- 
alem et corporalem...Convenit ergo 
quod sit unio divine nature ad huma- 
nam in unitate persone; ut sit in 
rerum universitate perfectio; ut sicut 
tres persone in una natura, et tres 
persone in tribus naturis, ita tres 
nature in una persona, scilicet divini- 
tas, corpus, et anima. 

Irem, nos invenimus unitatem na- 
ture in pluribus personis...ut in Deo: 
Item...unitatem persone in pluribus 
naturis, ut in homine. Si ergo de 
perfectione nature est quod est in 
pluribus personis ergo et de perfectione 
erit quod potest esse in pluribus na- 
turis. Si ergo semper quod est per- 
fectius Deo tribuendum quantum ad 
naturam et quantum ad personam... 
convenit...quod uniatur divina na- 
tura nature create in persona divina, 
sed non....., cuilibet...... sed solum hu- 
mane; nec etiam cuilibet persone in 
Trinitate nisi filio...Relinquitur ergo 
quod circumscripto lapsu humane 
nature adhuc est convenientia unionis 
in persona filii. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 297 


In support of this view Alexander quotes a passage ascribed to 

Bernard, in which it is said that envy at the prospect of man’s 
destined union with the Son of God led to the fall of Lucifer; and 
that he planned the temptation to hinder the union which he fore- 
saw’; and another passage from [a work falsely ascribed to] Augus- 
tine. ‘God was therefore made man to bless the whole of man in 
‘Himself, that whether man went within by intellect, or went with- 
‘out by sense, he might find pasture in his Creator, pasture within 
‘in the knowledge of the Godhead, pasture without in the flesh of 
‘the Saviour’. This reason, he adds, remains even if the fall of 
human nature be excluded. 

On the other side he brings forward ‘the authority of the 
‘Church’ ‘in the preface to the [Easter] candle’ (nihil nasct profuit 
nisi redimi profuisset). This objection he removes by shewing that 
the words refer to man as fallen, and not to man absolutely. 

ALBERT THE GREAT, who was a Dominican, of a noble German ALBERT 
family and at last Bishop of Ratisbon, approached the question from ae AT, 
a different side. In commenting upon the section of the Sentences {πόρε 
in which Peter Lombard* shews ‘that God could have freed man 280. 
‘otherwise than He did,’ and then points out ‘why He chose to free 
‘him in that particular way,’ he comes to speak of the words : ‘ What 
‘so much rouses our minds and frees them from despair of immor- 
‘tality as that God esteemed us so highly that the Son of God 
‘remaining in Himself what He was, unchangeably good, and re- 
‘ceiving from us that which He was not, deigned to enter into 
‘fellowship with us and bear our ills by dying.’ On this view, 
he says, it appears that if man had not sinned [God] would not have 
challenged us so powerfully to His love as He does now. This, he 
continues, is implied in the words of the sequence : 


O culpa nimium beata 
Qua redempta est natura: 
Deus qui creavit omnia 
Nascitur ex femina*: 


1 The passage is referred to Hom. Alcher, a monk of Clairvaux. The 
super Jon. 2, and it is probably afree passage in De Civ. x. 27 is quite dif- 
adaptation of part of it. ferent in tone. 

2 De an, et spir. § 9 (quoted freely). 3 Sent. ili. Dist. xx, Art. 4. 

The treatise was probably written by 4 Daniel, Thesaurus Hymnol. ii. 3. 


208 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


which as much as say that because the guilt was incurred God was 
made man. And further, he adds, in some Churches a hymn is 
used at the blessing of the Easter Candle which contains the phrase, 
O felix culpa que tantum ac talem meruit habere redemptorem’, in 
which the Incarnation is distinctly made to depend upon the Fall. 
The same conclusion, he continues, is drawn from Rom. viii. 28 
(all things work together for good). For the only good which sin can 
be said to have wrought is in the Incarnation, which must therefore 
be supposed to have depended upon it. And further, if there had 
been no sin we should not have neeced a teacher, or liberator, or 
receemer. 

These are the arguments which Albert gives in support of the 
common opinion that the Incarnation was dependent on the Fall. 
On the other side he alleges the following arguments : 

1. Good is diffused (see above, p. 295). 

2. There are four conceivable modes of birth, and if any one of 
them, as the birth from a virgin, had been wanting, the order of 
production would not have been perfect. 

3. The Incarnation was foreseen from eternity, and so must 
have taken place under any circumstances. 

4. Man was created capable of being united to God, and this 
capability must have been satisfied. 

5. Sin in point of fact did not make man more fitted to be 
united to God, but less fitted. 

6. The perfection of the universe consists in a circular figure. 
It was fitting therefore that the two extremes of being, God and 
man, should be united. 

7. The greatest love is shewn in union. Since God therefore 
has the greatest love for man, His union with man cannot have been 
contingent. 

‘We must allow,’ he says in summing up, ‘that the solution of 
‘this question is uncertain, but as far as I can form an opinion 

1 Daniel, 1. c. 303, and notes. The est’ is omitted generally in German 
clause, together with the words which and French mss, while it is found in 


precede ‘O certe necessarium Adw pec- Italian mss. See p- 293, ἢ. 
catum, quod Christi morte deletum 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 299 


‘T believe that the Son of God would have been made man even if 
‘sin had never been. Still I say nothing positively on this point, 
‘but I believe this which I have said to accord better with the piety 
‘of faith [than the contrary opinion].’ He then examines in detail 
the answers which can be made to the arguments on both sides, and 
rightly remarking that the language of the Hymn is ‘very inexact’ 
(locutiones valde impropric), in the end reaffirms his judgment. 

The great pupil of Albert, THomas, Count or AQquinum (Doctor Tuomas 

angelicus), who declined the Archbishopric of Naples, himself te 
also of noble birth, treats the question with singular reverence τ 
and moderation, In his early commentary on the Sentences 
(c. 1255) he proposes four questions on the Incarnation (Sent. 
ii. Dist. i. Quest. 1): (1) Whether it was possible for God to be 
incarnate ; (2) Whether it was suitable (congruum); (3) Whether 
the Incarnation would have taken place if man had not sinned ; 
(4) On the time of the Incarnation. In discussing the third of these 
points he states at length the main arguments on both sides, and 
then concludes that ‘He alone can know the truth of this ques- 
‘tion Who was Born and Offered because He willed...Since the 
‘redemption of man from the slavery of sin is assigned in Holy 
‘Scripture as the sole cause of the Incarnation many say with good 
‘reason (probabilitas) that if man had not sinned, the Son of God 
‘would not have been man...Others however say that since by the 
‘Incarnation of the Son of God there was accomplished not only the 
‘liberation from sin, but also the exaltation of human nature, and 
‘the consummation of the whole universe, for these reasons even if 
‘sin had not existed the Incarnation would have taken place. And 
‘this also can be maintained with good reason.’ 

As time went on Thomas appears to have yielded more ΠΝ more 
to what he held to be the teaching of Scripture on a great mystery’ ; 


1 In his commentary ΟἹ τ Tim.i.13  Glossa:; Tolle morbum, et medicine 
(Lect. iv.) he says: Sed si nullus fuis- non opus erit. 
set peccator numquid incarnatus non Respondeo. Dicendum est quod ex 
fuisset? Videtur quod non: quia venit verbis sanctorum satis(?) hoc patet. 
peccatores salvos facere. Non ergo Sed hac questio non est magne auc- 
fuisset necessaria incarnatio. Item  toritatis: quia Deus ordinavit fienda 


300 THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


and in his latest work (the Summa, c. 1270) he speaks with tolerable 
distinctness on the main issue, yet so as to recognise the validity of 
some (at least) of the grounds on which the contrary opinion had 
been maintained. 

The first Question in the Third Part of his Summa is on ‘the 
The first three Arti- 
cles, under which it is discussed, deal with the following topics: (1) 
Whether it was fitting (conveniens) that God should be incarnate ; 


‘Fitness (convenientia) of the Incarnation.’ 


(2) Whether it was necessary for the reparation of the human race 
that the Word of God should be incarnate ; (3) Whether if man had 
not sinned, God would have been incarnate. 

His conclusion on the first point is that ‘since the nature of God 
‘is the essence of goodness, and it pertains to the character (rationem) 
‘of good that it communicates itself to others; it is clear that it 
‘became God in the highest degree to communicate Himself to His 
‘creatures, which was fulfilled in the work of the Incarnation.’ 

The force of this argument (as we have seen before) is evidently 
wholly independent of the consequences of the Fall. So far therefore 
it might seem that Thomas was inclined to hold that this divine 
fitness would have been realised in the Incarnation apart from sin. 
But the discussion of the second Article brings into prominence the 
adaptation of the Incarnation to the wants of fallen man. And thus 
when he reaches the third Article he decides that ‘ Although God 
‘might have been incarnate if sin had not existed, yet it is said more 


‘fittingly that if man had not sinned God would not have been 


secundum quod res fiends erant. Et 
nescimus quid ordinasset si non pre- 
scivisset peccatum. Nihilominustamen 
auctoritates videntur expresse sonare 
quod non fuisset incarnatus si non 
peccasset homo in quam partem ego 
magis declino, 

Compare Quest. de Ver. xxix. 3, 4. 
(If we admit that Christ would not 
have been Incarnate if man had not 
sinned, He would have been Head of 
the Church in His Divine Nature only.) 
The passage is characteristic: Sup- 
posita illa opinione quod Christus non 
fuisset incarnatus si homo non pec- 


casset, Christus ante peccatum fuisset 
caput ecclesiz secundum divinam na- 
turam solum ; sed post peccatum opor- 
tet quod sit ecclesie caput etiam 
secundum humanam. Nam per pec- 
catum natura humana vulnerata est 
et ad sensibilia demersa, ut ad invisi- 
bilem Verbi gubernationem non sit 
sufficienter idonea. Unde oportuit 
medicinam vulneri adhiberi per huma- 
nitatem Christi per quam Christus 
satisfecit, et oportuit quod visibilem 
naturam assumeret ut per visibilem 
gubernationem ad _ invisibilia homo 
revocaretur, 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 301 


‘incarnate, since in Holy Scripture the ground (ratio) of the Incar- 
‘nation is everywhere set down as springing from the sin of the first 
‘man (ex peccato...assignetur).’ 

This opinion he holds to be more probable because we can know 

that which depends on the will of God from Scripture only; and 
Scripture presents the Incarnation as the Divine remedy for sin. 
Sin, he goes on to say, may have been the occasion for the greater 
elevation of the human race; for God permits evil to happen that 
He may bring a greater good out of it. And thus he quotes without 
disapprobation the sequence, which his master Albert had criticised, 
“Ὁ felix culpa.’ 

GIOVANNI DI Fipenza, who is known by the name of BoNnaven- Bonaven- 
TuRA from the exclamation of Francis of Assisi on the occasion of sae 
his restoration to health when a child, combined the schoolman and 
the mystic in a character of singular beauty. His master, Alexander 
of Hales, is said to have remarked that ‘Adam did not sin in Bona- 
‘ventura.’ Even Luther gave him special praise ; and the popular 
judgment was expressed in his title ‘doctor seraphicus.’ Bonaven- 
tura entered the order of the Franciscans (1248), and he became 
doctor on the same day and died in the same year as his Dominican 
He deals with the subject of the 
absolute motive of the Incarnation more fully and (if possible) more 
Indeed it was said that the 


third Book of the Sentences, the Doctrine of the Incarnation, was 


contemporary Thomas Aquinas. 
reverently than his more famous rival. 


his peculiar field’. 
In treating of the whole subject he first examines’ the question 
of the possibility of the union of the divine and human natures: he 


then examines the question of the suitableness (congruitas) of the 


1 Compare: Non itaque absque causa 
tantam admiratus est in operibus ejus 
doctrinam et eruditionem 5. Thomas 
Aquinas ut petierit a Bonaventura sibi 
ostendi libros ex quibus tam multipli- 
cem atque adeo magnam eruditionis 
ubertatem hauriret. Is vero Christi 
Domini Cruci affixi imaginem demon- 
stravit, e quo fonte uberrimo se acci- 


pere professus est quicquid vel legeret 
vel sentiret (Wadding, Annales, rv. 
139)- 
2 nr. Dist. i. Quest. «. There are 
considerable variations in the texts 
of Bonaventura which I have used, 
but they do not affect the general scope 
of his arguments. 


302 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


union. Under the latter head he raises four points. ‘1. Whether 
“it was suitable that God should become incarnate. 2. Whether 
‘the cause of the Son of God coming into the world was the restora- 
‘tion (reparatio) of the human race ; whether, that is, if man had 
‘not sinned Christ would have been Incarnate. 3. Whether it was 
‘suitable that of the three Persons the Son should be Incarnate. 
“4. Whether the Son of God was Incarnate at a suitable time.’ 

He approaches the second point as Thomas also did, from the side 
of Scripture, and gives the negative arguments first. The general 
language of the Bible and the current glosses, so he states the argu- 
ment, represent the coming of Christ as being for the redemption of 
man (Gal. iv. 4; Hebr. 11. 14; Ps. lxix. (xviii) 2). 

Further, Christ assumed human nature either for its dignity or 
its necessity. But it could not have been for the former seeing that 
the nature of angels is nobler. And man’s necessity came from 
sin. 

Further, the Incarnation is a work of grace; but the grace is 
greater as the object of it is more unworthy. 

Having thus given summarily the arguments in favour of the 
current opinion, Bonaventura states the reasoning on the opposite 
side at greater length. 

1. He first gives the argument from the Pseudo-Augustine 
which was urged by Alexander οὗ Hales. ‘Man required to be 
‘made wholly blessed (debebat totus beatificari), and that as fully if 
‘he had not fallen as after he had fallen.’ 

2. ‘The union with a Divine Person is not given to the nature 
‘of angels (Hebr. ii. 16). If therefore...nothing has been given to 
‘human nature in vain, such a dignity would not have remained 
‘unfulfilled (vacua), but it would still have been united with the 
‘Divine nature.’ 

3. ‘It became God as much to manifest His infinity and per- 
‘fection and bountiful love (liberalitas) if man had stood as if he 
‘had fallen...’ 

4. ‘It is a work of as great difficulty and nobility to lay claim 


‘to and gain (vindicare et acquirere) an infinite good, as to make 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


‘satisfaction for an offence against an infinite good. If therefore 
‘man could not by himself make satisfaction for the offence com- 
‘mitted against God, neither could he by himself earn the posses- 
‘sion of God (mereri habere Dewm). Therefore as it was seasonable 
‘(opportunum) that the Son of God should be incarnate on the fall of 
‘man, to make satisfaction for man, so it seems seasonable that the 
‘Son of God should be incarnate, if man had remained unfallen 
‘(homine stante), that man through Him might earn [the divine 
‘union].’ 

5. ‘If the Incarnation took place primarily (principaliter) for 
‘the expiation of sin, then the soul of Christ’ was made not of 
‘primary purpose (principali intentione) but contingently (quadam 
‘occasione); if therefore it is incongruous (inconveniens) that the 
‘noblest object of creation should have been brought into being con- 
‘tingently (occasionaliter esse introductum), while an agent primarily 
‘ purposes the noblest works, it seems to be incongruous to say that 
‘the Incarnation took place only for the restoration (reparationem) 
‘of man.’ 

6. ‘In the Incarnation of the Son of God human nature is most 
‘highly exalted. If therefore God was Incarnate because human 
‘nature sinned ; it appears that man gains an advantage from his 
‘wickedness...’ 

7. ‘Christ is the Head of the Church not only in His Divine 
‘Nature, but also in His human Nature...But if man had not sinned 
‘the Body of the Church would still have existed. Hither therefore 
‘the Son of God would have become Incarnate or the Church would 
‘have remained without a Head.’ 

8. ‘If man had not fallen the sacrament of marriage would 
‘have existed....If therefore man had remained unfallen, either the 
‘sacrament of marriage would have been a false sign (Eph. v. 32) 
‘or the Son of God would have been Incarnate. But the first sup- 
‘ position is impossible.’ 

9. ‘There are four ways in which we can conceive of man being 
produced: (1) of man and woman, (2) without man or woman 


1 Comp. p. 291. 


303 


304 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


(Adam), (3) of man without woman (Eve), (4) of woman without 
man (Christ). Unless this fourth possibility had been realised the 
universe would not have been perfect. 

το. Yet further Bonaventura goes on to consider the assump- 
tion of human nature, as distinguished from the assumption of mor- 
tality by the Son of God, as belonging to the perfection of man, 
and by consequence to the perfection of the universe, both in regard 
to nature, and grace, and glory. 

Having thus set out both views, he concludes: ‘ Which of these 
‘two modes [of regarding the question] is the better, He knows 
‘Who was Incarnate for us. Which of them is to be preferred 
‘it is difficult to see, inasmuch as each is in accordance with 
‘the catholic faith and is supported by catholic men. Moreover 
‘each excites the soul to devotion on different grounds. The first 
‘view however seems to be more consonant with the judgment of 
‘reason: the second, as it appears, is more consonant with the piety 
‘of faith. First because it is in closer agreement with [the letter οὔ] 
‘Holy Scripture, the authority of Saints...and secondly because it 
‘gives greater honour to God...since the other view makes God in 
‘some sense dependent on the universe... Thirdly ..because an excep- 
‘tional cause is assigned for an exceptional mystery...Fourthly be- 
‘cause it kindles the affection of faith more ardently...’ 

Having thus stated his general conclusion he suggests answers to 
the arguments which he had given in favour of the view which 
he finally sets aside. They deserve to be indicated in outline : 

1. The beatitude of man which comes through the Incarna~ 
tion, and from the corporeal vision of Christ, is accidental and not 
essential. 

2. There are many potencies in creation which are not brought 
to act; but these are not in vain. 

3. These attributes of God are adequately manifested in crea- 
tion. 

4. Even allowing the premiss, the blessing of divine fellowship 
might have been secured by the mission of the Holy Spirit into the 
soul without the mission of the Son into the flesh. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 305 


5. God foreknew the fall and provided for it from eternity. 

6. The Incarnation was not from (ex) man’s wickedness, but 
from God’s goodness. The obedience of Christ pleased Him more 
than the disobedience of Adam displeased Him. 

4. The Church would not have been without a Head. As God 
is the Head of man, so He would have been the Head of the Church 
of men, as He is the Head of the Church of angels. 

8. The sign of marriage would still have marked the union of 
Christ with the Church by love. 

9. The fourth mode of production is beyond the perfection of 
the universe (Jer. xxxi.) ; moreover the man so produced need not 
have been also the Son of God. 

After this reply he concludes : ‘These statements I desire to be 
‘made (dicta sint) without prejudice. For I do not wish to confine 
‘the goodness of God, but to commend the excess of His love 
‘towards fallen man, that our affections may be roused to love Him 
‘while we mark the extremity of His exceeding love.’ 

The transition from the calm and eloquent tenderness of Bona- Duns Sco- 
ventura to the stern roughness of Duns Scotus is most abrupt. Ἐπ. 11308: 
Duns Scotus (doctor subtilis) is simply the dialectician, without 
grace, without sympathy, inexhaustible in ingenuity, and unhesi- 
tating in decision. He is the master without the softening experi- 
ences of the ecclesiastic. In affirming that the Incarnation was 
independént of the Fall, he dwells mainly on the conceivable order 
of thoughts in the divine counsel, a form of argument which was 
only lightly touched before. 

‘The Incarnation of Christ was not foreseen as a contingent event 
‘(occasionaliter previsa), but was seen by God directly (immediate) 
‘as an end from eternity: so Christ, in His human Nature, since He 
‘is nearer to the end than other things, was predestined before 
‘them...1” 


_1 Opus Oxoniense, iii. Dist. xix.; Deo ab sterno, ita Christus in natura 
Wadding, vii. 1, p. 413. Incarnatio humana, cum sit propinquior fini, 
Christi non fuit occasionaliter previsa ceteris prius predestinabatur loquendo 
sed sicut finis immediate videbatur a de his que predestinantur... 


Ww. J. 20 


306 


GaBRIEL 
BIE. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


And again: ‘If the Fall was the cause of the Incarnation of 
‘Christ, it would follow that the greatest work of God was con- 
‘tingent only (occasionatum tantum), because the glory of all things 
‘will not be so great (¢ntensive) as that of Christ, and it seems to be 
‘very irrational to suppose that God would have left undone (dim- 
‘ sissel) so great a work because of Adam’s right action, that is, if 
‘he had not sinned'.’ 

The thought is set out more fully in the following passage : 

‘[God] wills grace and glory to any other being soever before He 
‘foresees the opposites of those habits...that is sin and condemnation. 
‘Therefore from the first He wills the glory of the soul of Christ 
‘before He foresees that Adam will fall...Redemption, we allow, 
“would not have required to be made if man had not sinned. But 
“it was not for this reason only that God seems to have predestined 
‘that soul to so great glory, seeing that redemption, or the glory of 
‘redeeming the soul, is not so great a good as is that glory of the 
‘soul of Christ, nor is it likely that the sovereign good in being (tam 
‘summum bonum in entibus) was only contingent, that is dependent 
‘on a less good...®.’ 

No fresh arguments appear to have been added on either side 
after Duns Scotus. GABRIEL BIEL, ‘the last of the schoolmen’ who 
assisted in the foundation of the Gymnasium at Tiibingen (1477), 


1 Opus Parisiense, iii. Dist. vii. Quest. 3; Wadding, vil. 1, p. 202 


Quest. 4; Wadding, xi. p. 451: Si 
lapsus esset causa predestinationis 
Christi sequeretur quod summum opus 
Dei esset occasionatum tantum, quia 
gloria ommnium non erit tanta intensive 
quanta erit Christi; et quod tantum 
opus dimisisset Deus per bonum fac- 
tum Adz, puta, si non peccasset, vide- 
tur valde irrationabile. 

Dico igitur sic: Primo Deus diligit 
se: secundo diligit se aliis (?), et iste 
amor est castus; tertio vult se diligi 
ab alio qui potest eum summe dili- 
gere, loquendo de amore alicujus ex- 
trinseci: et quarto previdit unionem 
illius natures que debet eum summe 
diligere etsi nullus cecidisset. 


2 Opus Oxoniense, ili. Dist. vii. 


...[Deus] prius cuilibet alteri vult 
gratiam et gloriam quam prevideat 
opposita istorum habituum...scilicet 
peccatum et damnationem. Ergo a 
primo prius vult anime Christi glo- 
riam quam prevideat Adam casurum 
...Sed nec redemptio fuisset facienda 
nisi homo peccasset. Sed non propter 
solam istam causam videtur Deus 
preedestinavisse illam animam ad tan- 
tam gloriam. Cum illa redemptio sive 
gloria anim redimends non sit tan- 
tum bonum quantum est illa gloria 
anime Christi; nec est verisimile tam 
summum bonum in entibus esse tan- 
tum occasionatum, scilicet propter 
minus bonum... 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


in his lectures on ‘the Sentences’ which were delivered there gives 
a general review of opinion upon the subject, and leaves the decision 
in suspense. He starts from the teaching of Thomas Aquinas, 
which he quotes at length, and gives in the course of his lecture an 
account of the opinions of Alexander of Hales, and Duns Scotus, 
justly remarking in reply to his argument from the priority of the 
predestination of Christ to glory in relation to the Fall, that in such 
questions we cannot speak of ‘before’ and ‘after.’ This criticism 
he supports by the authority of Occam. ‘The problem therefore 
‘remains doubtful’—this is his conclusion—‘...until the Lord shall 


‘deem it right to make a revelation’.’ 


Still one other writer, Joun WesseL, must be noticed before 
we leave the 15th century. Wessel was born at Groningen about 
1419 and died in the same place in 1489. In spirit and pursuits and 
doctrine he belongs to a period of transition. Like Rupert of Deutz, 
the first medieval writer whom he noticed, he expresses the striving 
after a new and direct approach to the source of truth. Like Rupert 
he also based his doctrine with absolute devotion upon Holy Scrip- 
ture; and he is described in his epitaph as justifying his claim to 
teach by a knowledge of Hebrew and Greek. His relation to Rupert 
is still closer than that of a kindred character. Hardenberg, his 
early biographer, relates that while studying at Cologne he grew 
weary of the mere repetition of the teaching of Thomas Aquinas and 
Albert the Great, and often crossed the Rhine to the Abbey of 
Deutz, where he found in the works of Rupert fresher and more 
congenial thoughts. From these writings he transcribed many 
passages, to which he added other extracts and comments of his 
own. This collection of notes and fragments he afterwards arranged 
and called his‘ Mare magnum.’ The collection itself has perished ; 
but the two essays de causis Incarnationis and de magnitudine 
Passionis Domini, with which we are chiefly concerned, are said to 


have been derived in great part from it; and it is not difficult to 


1 τ, Dist. ii. Quest. 1. 
20-2 


307 


JoHN 
WESSEL, 
I419— 
1489. 


308 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


see how the speculations of Rupert have influenced the views which 
Wessel maintains in them. 

Wessel approaches the subject of the Incarnation characteristic- 
ally from a comparison of two passages of the Old Testament’, 
‘Tam God, I change not’ (Mal. iii. 6), and ‘I am he that I am’ 
(Ex. iii. 14). The latter translation is, he says, inadequate, though 
he believes that it was by a divine purpose that the Lxx and Jerome 
preserved the present tense. The true rendering, he maintains, is: 
‘I will be the man I will be’ (ero homo qui ero). There is then an 
antithesis to be reconciled in this twofold revelation of the divine 
nature; and the antithesis is reconciled for us, he argues, in the 
Incarnation. 

The language of St Paul in Rom. ix. 28, as represented in the 
Vulgate, furnishes Wessel with his next illustration’. ‘ Verbum 
abbreviatum et consummatum,’ he says, ‘fecit Deus super terram.’ 
And this was done in three ways. The divine Word, remaining in 
Himself unchangeable, was brought within limits (abbreviatum) at 
the Creation, but not consummated. He was also brought within 
limits in Holy Scripture, as it is said ‘day unto day uttereth Word,’ 
but still the Word was not consummated in the written Word 
‘ quantunrlibet liquescentis veritatis claritaie resplendens.’ Once again 
therefore the Word was brought within limits and consummated 
by the Incarnation. 

Here then, he continues’, is a fitting place to inquire why God 
was made man: Cur Deus homo? Again and again he repeats 
Anselm’s famous question, and answers it by paraphrases of pas- 
sages of Scripture which he quotes. The whole section is so full of 
thought, and offers so vivid a picture of Wessel’s mode of interpret- 
ing the Bible, that it must be quoted entire. 

‘Why was God made man? Why, but that that holy and fair 
body, the universal Church of the triumphant saints, might not be 
‘maimed but rejoice in its proper Head. Eph. i. 22; Col. i. 18, ii. το. 

‘Why was God made man? That the building of the Holy 
Temple might have its corner-stone in which the two walls of men 


1 De causis Incarn. c. iv. 2 1ά. ς. v. 3 Id. c. vi. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


and angels might meet and find their foundation. Ps. exviii. 22 ; 
Acts iv. 11 [referred to St Stephen]; 1 Cor. iii. rr, 1 Cor. x. 4. 

‘Why was God made man? That all creation (creatura) might 
have a Mediator common to God and creation. Gal. iii. 19; 1 Tim. 
11. 5. 

‘Why was God made man? That the’ whole host (militia) of 
God and all the people of God might have their King. Luke i. 33; 
Apoc. xix. 16. 

‘Why was God made man? That the School of God might have 
its Teacher. Joel ii. 23 (doctorem justitie as mg. A.V.). 

‘Why was God made man? That the city of Jerusalem might 
have its Temple. Apoc. xxi. 22. 

‘Why was God made man? That the temple of the heavenly 
Jerusalem might have its High Priest. Ps. cx. 4; Hebr. v. 4. 

‘Why was God made man? That all the daughters of God might 
find their Bridegroom and the pattern (paradigma) of their love. 
John iii. 29; Matt. ix. 15. 

‘Why was God made man? That all who sacrifice in the Temple 
of God might have their sacrifice (hostia). Hebr. ix. 13 ἢ. And if 
all do not offer sacrifices or victims for the present, still part do for 
the past, and all for preservation (de preservato) offer sacrifices and 
victims and offerings for sin and ignorance, and tithes and first-fruits 
and peace offerings. All whether men or angels offer whole burnt 
offerings and incense in this Temple. 

‘Why was God made man? That all the sheep of God’s pasture 
might have their common shepherd. John x. 2, 9. He left His 
ninety and nine sheep on the mountains, going away to seek the one 
which had strayed. A common shepherd then had been destined and 
predestined for this and for those, as He had been before foreseen 
and hated (preevisus et invisus) by Lucifer who pursues the Lamb. 

‘Why was God made man? That all the sons of God and all 
creation might have their first-born brother. Rom. viii. 29; Col. 
1. 15.’ 

It is easy to anticipate the answer which Wessel gives to the 
next question which he asks: ‘Whether God the Word would have 


309 


310 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


‘assumed flesh even if man had not sinned?’ His answer however 
rests mainly upon another form of argument akin to that of Duns 
Scotus. He regards the humanity assumed by Christ (creatwram 
illam beatam a Verbo adsumptam in unionem hypostaticam) as so full 
of grace, and righteousness and glory, that its fulness alone outweighs 
in the judgment of God all the fulness of the whole remaining 
creation. ‘God therefore loved Christ more from eternity than the 
‘whole of the rest of the Church, and before it.’ ‘Nay the rest of 
‘the body would not have been destined [to glory], except it had 
‘been [included] in the dignity of the Sacred Head?’ 

‘We must consequently use great care (reverentia) in dealing with 
‘the phrase in the Nicene Creed ‘Who for us men...,’ as if the Word 
‘was made Flesh for our sakes, when otherwise He would not have 
‘been so made. For in final causes, which are essentially coordinated, 
‘the order is not that the better are for the worse...®.’ 

Even the angels who had not fallen were, as Wessel teaches, 
immeasurably blessed by the Incarnate Christ. ‘Whence’ he con- 
cludes ‘theirs is an unworthy question who ask ‘Whether if Adam 
‘*had not sinned the Word would have been made flesh?’ For that 
‘wise designer (destinator) of the holy city Jerusalem had purposed 
‘ (destinaverat) to grant union and perfection among its citizens, that 
‘the natural union of the head and members is inadequate to express 
‘it. It is then like asking in the case of an ulcerated arm or leg, 
‘whether if the arm had not been ulcerated the head would have 
‘been given to the combination of members to heal the arm or ποὺ" 

This figure presents an impressive view of Wessel’s general 
teaching, which he sums up in a series of brief propositions, tracing 
the fulfilment of the divine counsel from the creation to the consum- 
mation of all things*. This series concludes thus: ‘God destined 
‘and regarded (intendit) the Lamb as first and the first-fruits of all 
‘creation. He destined that the Lamb should become man. He 
‘destined the Lamb as King of a blessed state. It was fitting (con- 


‘gruebat) that the Man-Lamb being King should have men as 
‘citizens of His kingdom. 


1 De causis Incarn. ¢. vii. 2 Id. α. vii. 3 Id. ο. xiv. 4 Id. α. xv. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 311 


‘The Lamb has the promise from the Father that men should be 

given Him at His request as His inheritance. 

‘Tf neither angel nor man had fallen the Lamb in bliss would no 
‘less have reigned over them. 

‘Still truly ‘for us men and for our salvation He came down 
‘*from heaven.’ 

‘He was truly made man for our salvation, suffered, died, was 
‘buried. 

‘He was not however wholly or entirely (non penitus non prorsus) 
‘made man for our salvation. 

‘For our salvation wholly He suffered, died, was buried, being 
‘made a sacrifice and victim. It was not wholly to restore (curare) 
‘us from destruction, that He was made an offering (sacrificium), a 
‘holocaust, incense. 

‘That most holy [human] soul [of Christ] was inflamed and 
‘borne to God by the impulse of its own love: It {or Christ] lived 
‘more for God and for itself [as directed] towards good than for 
‘saving all of us.’ 

Thus there were in Christ three ‘forms.’ The form of God, 
which is eternal; and in this He is equal in all things to the 
Father: the form of a slave, which He assumed for the sake of 
sinners, which was temporal, and in this He emptied Himself: the 
form of the supreme creature (supremi plasmatis), which He would 
have assumed even if man had not sinned. In the second form He 
will receive a kingdom which afterwards He will give back to the 
Father. The kingdom which He has in the third form will be for 
ever and ever (Luke i. 32 f.)’. 

Thus wrote the Dutch mystic from his northern home. About Prcus or 
the same time Picus, count of Mirandola, the most brilliant type of rem ὩΣ 
the universal scholarship of the. Renaissance, maintained the same 
doctrine from a different point of view. ‘It was fitting,’ he writes, 
‘that He Who is the image of the invisible God, the first-born of all 
‘creation, in Whom all things (universa) were created, should be 
‘united in an ineffable union to him (i.e. man) who was made after 


1 De causis Incarn, 6. xvii. 


312 


Nacnan- 
TUS. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


‘the image of God, who is the bond of all creation, in whom all 
‘things are included (conclusa). And if the whole of nature was 
‘imperilled by man, its loss was not to be disregarded, or to be 
‘repaired by any other than by Him by Whom all nature had been 


‘framed’.’ ' 


In the age of the Reformation the question was still debated. 
Among the Romanist divines who maintained that the Incarnation 
was independent of the Fall, Giacomo Nacuranti, bishop of Chiozza 
(Jacobus Naclantus, Hp. Clodiensis, or Clugiensis), a Dominican, is 
the most conspicuous’. His general spirit is characterised by a 
remark in the preface to his commentary on the Epistle to the 
Ephesians, in which he gives as the reason for discussing that 
Epistle before the Epistle to the Romans, that it suggests in its 
‘loftier and more mysterious revelations, which are truly brought 
‘from the third heaven, many thoughts which are necessary for the 
‘understanding of the latter.’ 

The argument by which Naclantus supports his opinion is an 
analysis of the divine counsel of creation as man can apprehend it. 
In this he argues that man was marked out as the object of the 
divine love, and that in regard to him an end absolutely perfect 


1 In Hept. v. 7. 

I do not observe among the theses of 
Picus any one on this subject, as there 
is commonly said to be. 

Wicuir appears to regard the In- 
carnation as lying in some sense 
eternally in the Nature of the Word: 
assumpsit [Verbum] in unitatem per- 
sone humanitatem integram, faciendo 
se esse illam personam hominis que 
eternaliter prius fuit, quia secundum 
naturam Verbi eternaliter prius fuit 
(Trialogus, iii. 27, p. 224). 

2 The glimpses which are gained of 
Nachianti at the Council of Trent are 
full of interest. He spoke warmly 
against placing traditions on the same 
footing as Scripture: Nemo enim 
ignorat contineri in sacris libris ea 
omnia que ad salutem pertinent...Quod 
vero etiam ecclesiastice traditiones re- 


cipiantur et eorum mentio in decreto 
fiat nullo modo probare possum, cum 
tot indictiones jejuniorum, tot cere- 
monis, que plerumque frustratorie 
sunt, nimis Christianum populum 
gravant (Theiner, dcta Conc. Trident. 
1. 58 f.). And again: Non possum 
pati ut sepe dixi, s. synodum pari 
pietatis affectu suscipere traditiones et 
libros sanctos; hoc enim, ut vere 
dicam quod sentio, impium est. Neque 
placet quod ponatur anathema in ipsis 
traditionibus... A lively scene followed 
these bold words, which ended in an 
explanation and an apology (id. 85). 
Comp. pp. 76, 82. The words of Na- 
chianti were condemned by the Council, 
and Card. Pole joined in the condem- 
nation: ‘sed posset, inquit, defendi, 
quia dixit, “mihi videtur”’ (id. p. 85). 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 313 


must have been prepared before the means towards the end. This 
end regarded man’s spiritual and eternal state; and therefore his 
approach to God and his union with God. And when it is said that 
man was the crown of creation, we mean in particular Christ as 
man, by Whom as God and man, in the divine counsel, and therefore 
truly man, even before the Incarnation, it was predestined that the 
The effect of 
the Fall then was that He Who ‘was determined to be man, but not 
‘passible, ordained the Maker of the world, appointed Heir of the 


‘universe, chosen as King of all things, given as Head to the 


world should be made, preserved and consummated?. 


‘peculiar possession (peculio) of God the Father, should in due 
‘season be sent down, lowered (dejici), emptied, that clothed in 
‘passible flesh’ He might make atonement for sin’. 

Whence Naclantus concludes, ‘it is not only consonant to reason 
‘but to Holy Scripture, that although the decree for the assumption 
‘of flesh follows the decree for the permission of sin, so that if Adam 
‘had not sinned there would have been no need of Christ as a 
‘Physician, yet the decree of the assumption of man precedes not 
‘only the decree of the permission of sin, but even the determination 
‘of the creation of the world®.’ 

The same general conclusion that ‘the Son of God would have rom ta 
‘been Incarnate if sin had not entered into the world,’ was main- trs52. 
tained in the Lutheran Church by Anpr. OstanpER*. This singularly 


1 Kodem constitutum est decreto ut bilem carnem induto...... mortem exe- 


per eundem Deum et hominem Cuxais- 
tum (hoc est) verbum definitione Dei ad 
induendum hominem determinatum, 
et ob id hominem vere apud Deum 
effectum non solum quelibet condere- 
tur, servaretur, ac promoveretur crea- 
tura...sed...in longe feliciorem statum 
...certo transferretur tempore...p. 38. 
2 Decretum......Unigenitum summi 
Patris, jam quidem hominem sed non 
passibilem definitum, Opificem orbis 
ordinatum, Heredem universorum 
institutum, in Regem omnium rerum 
selectum, Peculio Dei patris donatum, 
et eidem uti caput ascriptum; tandem 
(sed opportuno tempore) eousque de- 
mitti, dejici, exinaniri: ut eo passi- 


crabilem passo, impensa tanti sacri- 
ficii crimen expiaretur lesx majestatis 
Dei.:.p. 39. 

3 Qua de re, si non fallor, facile ex 
premissis habetur: non modo con- 
sonum esse rationi sed et Scripturis 
Sanctis: quod etsi decretum assump- 
tionis carnis decretum subsequitur 
permissionis culpz, propter quod si 
Adam non peccasset Curisto medico 
opus non fuisset: decretum tamen 
assumendi hominem non tantum pre- 
cedit permissionem peceati sed et defi- 
nitionem creationis Mundi (ib. 39 f.). 

4 The title of the work in which he 
discusses the question is: An Filius 
Dei fuerit incarnandus si peccatun 


314 THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


vigorous and original thinker’ brought the doctrine into connexion 
with his peculiar views on justification. Man, he taught, is justified 
by the indwelling in him of the Divine Word ‘ our Lord and Saviour 
‘and only Mediator, Jesus Christ, Son of God and Son of Mary, 
‘very God and very man... And since the one eternal and divine 
‘essence of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit is indivisible, the Father 
‘and the Holy Spirit also dwell in us®.’ The divine likeness, for 
which man was made, according to his original constitution, involved 
This 
The 


most interesting feature in the arguments by which Osiander sup- 


the union of God and man as presented in the Incarnation. 


opinion was fiercely assailed as ‘new, useless, and impious.’ 


ports his teaching is the form of his biblical proof. He was specially 
devoted to the study of Scripture, and thought that the confirmation 
of the doctrine was to be sought there rather than in authority. 
And such confirmation he found primarily in the account of Creation, 
wherein man is revealed to have been ‘made in the image of God.’ 

This statement then formed the starting point of his discussion. 
What, he asks, is ‘the image of God’? The answer, he replies, is to 
be found in the words of Christ: ‘He that hath seen Me hath seen 
‘the Father’ (John xiv. 9). ‘Therefore our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
‘Son of God and the Son of Mary, is the image of the Father....The 
‘Word made flesh, the Word of life which was from the begin- 
‘ning, which the apostles heard and handled with their hands, as 
‘John bears witness (1 John i. 1)*’ In other words ‘He in Whom 
‘the fulness of Godhead (Father, Son and Spirit) dwells, Jesus Christ, 
‘or the humanity of Christ, embracing the divinity, ...is the real ob- 
‘jective image of God*.’ 


non introivisset in mundum. Item de 
imagine Dei quid sit ex certis et eviden- 


mentatio...scr. R. Ἐς Grau, Marb. 
1860). There is a good and sympa- 


tibus sacre Scripture testimoniis et 
non ex philosophicis et humane rationis 
cogitationibus deprompta explicatio. 
Monteregio Prussiw 1550. I have been 
unable to obtain access to a copy of 
the book which is not, as far as I can 
find, in any of our great libraries. I 
can therefore quote it only from Grau’s 
Essay (de And. Osiandri doctrina com- 


thetic account of Osiander’s views in 
Moller’s life (Andreas Osiander...von 
Dr W. Moller, Elberfeld, 1870). 

1 « Homo αὐτοδίδακτος nulliusque Aca- 
demi discipulus,’ as Quenstedt dis- 
paragingly remarks (p. 110). 

2 Grau, p. 27. 

3 Grau, l.c. p. 5. 

* Osiander ap. Grau, p. 7. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 315 


Thus Christ was destined to be naturally the image and glory of 
God ; and God made man, the whole man and not any part of him, 
capable of becoming like Christ through His pure grace and goodness. 
Man, that is, was created to be as it was already determined eternally 
that Christ should be’. 

This being the Destiny of man, the Incarnation, Osiander argues, 
was necessarily independent of the Fall. The image of God in which 
man was created was first realised in the Incarnation. Looking for- 
ward to this, in the language of time, God created man. Otherwise 
man could not have been created in God’s image, which would have 
had no existence’. 

Further the relation of Christ to the Church as its Head cannot 
And this, Osiander 
thinks, was already shadowed forth in the record of Creation before 
the Fall (Gen. ii. 23 ἢ; comp. Matt. xix. 4 ἔν; Eph. v. 31 f.). 

In a word all things were created for the Son, Who was to be 


be supposed to be dependent on man’s sin. 


incarnate (comp. Col. i. 13—20). 
Osiander rests his conclusion on Scripture, but he finds support 
for it also in the language of the Nicene Creed. ‘Christ came down 
‘from heaven for us men and for our salvation” Here, he says, we 
have two distinct thoughts. He was Incarnate ‘for us men’ as men 
created for Him and in His image; and ‘for our salvation’ as having 
fallen through sin*. 
Among those who had wandered far from the Catholic faith Serverts, 
Servetus and F. Socinus maintained that the coming of Christ in SSS 
the flesh was independent of the Fall. 


‘was made after the pattern, form, figure and image of Christ, in 


‘Adam,’ the former writes, 


1 Osiander’s reasons are given at 
length by Grau, pp. 12 ff., and Méller, 
pp. 394 fi. 

2 Si filius Dei non fuisset incarnan- 
dus nisi Adam peccasset, sequeretur 
aliud absurdum, nempe quod Adam 
non Imagine Christi sed Christus 
Imagine Adami esset factus (Osiander, 
ap. Grau, p. 13). 

3. Quis non videat Spiritum Sanctum 
hic duas inter sese longe diversissimas 
causas ostendere propter quas Filius 


Dei descenderit de calis et homo factus 
sit? Quarum prior est quia nos ho- 
mines eramus homines propter ipsum 
et imagine eius conditi, qui conditi 
nunquam fuissemus nisi ipse quoque 
voluisset homo fieri et inter nos ver- 
sari (Prov. viii.). Posterior causa est 
quia per peccatum corrueramus in mor- 
tem, unde nos eruere et salutem nobis 
restituere dignatus est (ap. Grau, p. 


15). 


316 THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


‘body and soul!’ And again ‘Christ Himself before Adam sinned 
‘was already in the Word with God, destined to be true man. If 
‘Adam had not sinned Christ would have been Incarnate so as not 
‘to die, and would have provided for our change while living to 


‘heavenly glory without any form of death*.’ 


F. Soct- F. Socrxnus, on the other hand, held that man was created 
nee μι Without the gift of immortality. Hence in discussing 1 Pet. 1. 20 
he maintains that ‘Christ came, after men had sinned, to do away 
‘their sins, but that He would have come even if men had not 
‘sinned. For He was destined to come to give us immortality which 
‘the first man did not possess at the beginning of creation...”.’ 
CaLvIN, Catvin attacked the doctrine and arguments of Osiander with 
oo considerable severity in the remodelled edition of his Institutes 


(1559). 


‘man although there had been no need of His interposition to redeem 


He characterises the opinion ‘that Christ would have been 


‘mankind,’ as one of those ‘wandering speculations that ravish 
‘unto them light spirits.’ ‘TI allow,’ he says, ‘that in the first order 
‘of creation, and while nature was undisturbed by the fall, [Christ] 
‘was set over angels and men, whereupon He is said by Paul to be 
‘the first-born of every creature (Col. i. 15). But since all Scripture 
‘declares that He was clothed with flesh to become Redeemer, it is 
‘an act of exceeding rashness to imagine another cause or another 
‘end’ He then quotes and examines Is. liii. 4 £; Johni. gf, 14, 
iii. τό, v. 25; Matt. xvill. ΣΙ, ix. 12, &c.; and continues: ‘If any 


‘object that some of these considerations are not opposed to the belief 


1 Christianismi Restitutio, 1553. De 
Trin. 111. Ὁ. τος: Ad exemplar igitur, 
formam, figuram, et imaginem Christi 
est factus Adam, secundum corpus et 
animum. 

3 Id. De orb. perdit. τ. p. 382: 
Christus ipse antequam Adam _pec- 
caret jam in verbo erat apud Deum, 
futurus verus homo. Si Adam non 
peccasset citra mortem fuisset Christus 
incarnatus, nos ad gloriam celestem 
viventes immutaturus absque aliqua 
morte. 

3 Prelect. Theol, x. 8 (Opera, τ. 540): 


Ceterum quia certum est Deum ante 
mundum conditum de mittendo Christo 
decrevisse, ne quis ex eo hominum pec- 
cata previsa fuisse colligat, sciendum 
est Christum quidem postquam homi- 
nes peccaverant ad ipsorum peccata 
delenda venisse sed venturum tamen 
fuisse etiamsi homines non peccassent. 
Venturus enim erat ad immortalitatem 
nobis dandam, qua...ab ipso creationis 
initio primus homo caruit... Comp. 
De statu primi hominis ante lapsum, ii. 
263 ff. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


‘that Christ Who redeemed men under condemnation might have 
‘shewn His love to them while still safe and unfallen by putting on 
‘flesh, the answer is short: since the Spirit proclaims that by the 
‘eternal decree of God these two facts were united together, that 
‘Christ should be our Redeemer, and partaker of the same nature 
‘with us, it is not right to inquire farther.... This modesty Osian- 
‘der unjustly assails, who at the present time has again unhappily 
‘discussed this question which was before slightly mooted by a 
‘few!’ 

Some Calvinists however maintained, and this touches close upon 
the essence of the doctrine, that unfallen men needed the media- 
torial work of Christ for the support of their union with God. A 
single illustration will be sufficient. Potanus thus expresses the 
thought: ‘From the beginning of the world [Christ] was and is the 
‘Mediator between God and the sons of God, as rational creatures 
‘made in the image of God, through Whom alone they had in the 
‘beginning and have blessedness, that is communion with and 
‘fruition of God as the highest good’’ 


IIT. 


The long line of authorities which we have examined shews The Gos- 


. 7 el of 
beyond question that ‘the Gospel of Creation’ is a just subject for Freation a 
legitimate 
topic of 
pendent of the Fall has been held by men of the most different 4""Y- 


All however in 


discussion. The belief that the Incarnation was in essence inde- 


schools, in different ways and on different grounds. 


1 Instit. ii. 12, 4—7. He concludes: 
Quas hactenus refutavi nenias, pro 
firmissimis oraculis ducit Osiander, 
nempe ut suarum speculationum dul- 
cedine inebriatus ridiculos peanas de 
nihilo efflare solet. 

2 Syntagma, vi. 27. Comp. Zan- 
chius in Hexaem. 111. Lib. 111. 6. 2. 
Docemus etiam in statu ante lapsum 
[Adamum] opus habuisse Christo me- 
diatore, non per quem reconciliaretur 
Patri...sed per quem preservaretur a 
peccato... Bucanus (Instit. Theol. Art. 


X. 3, Ρ- 106) uses almost the same 
words. I have not seen that the En- 
glish Reformers touched upon the ques- 
tion; and I cannot find Willett’s book 
de statu hominis, to which Gerhard 
refers (Loc. Theol. iii. p. 444), in the 
Library of the British Museum or in 
the Cambridge University Library. 

Bp Bull’s Discourse on ‘The State 
of Man before the Fall’ (Works ‘ii. 
52 ff), contains many suggestive 
thoughts which illustrate some aspects 
of the problem. 


318 THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


the main agree in this, that they find in the belief a crowning 
promise of the unity of the divine order ; a fulfilment, a consum- 
mation, of the original purpose of creation; a more complete and 
harmonious view of the relation of finite being to God than can be 
gained otherwise. 

The sense In every age the theory of the divine economy, if we may so 


f theo- : ᾿ ; 
ipeieal speak, will present itself under an aspect corresponding with the 


formulas 
must 


change. under human observation, presents itself. It cannot but be that 


general aspect under which the whole finite order, so far as it comes 


the views which are entertained of the relations of man to the earth 
on which he lives, of the earth to the universe, of the period of 
human life to the measurable period of the existence of the objects 
of sense, should affect our views of the Redemption and Consumma- 
tion of man, not in essence but in the mode of apprehension. It is 
impossible for us now to understand a formula which deals with 
man and the world in the sense in which it was understood when 
the earth was regarded as the centre of the system of material 
creation, and the human race as having existed for five or six 
thousand years. The effect upon the mind of the words in which 
it is expressed must be different even if we use the same words. 
And the sovereign preeminence of Scripture as the vehicle of 
spiritual knowledge lies in this, that it finds fuller interpretation 
from growing experience. The Scripture does not change, but our 
power of entering into its meaning changes. 
If then we endeavour to consider the question before us from 
Two the position in which we are placed in regard to the teaching of 


ti : ὃ 
ἐν τα ὴ Scripture, we shall be led (1) to examine what Scripture teaches or 
sheen of indicates as to the essential relations of man to God and to the 


Godand world, so far as we can now apprehend the revelation which is 
the world; 


2. The made of them; and then (2), looking at the whole revelation of the 


conse- ἍΝ : : 
pent divine purpose recorded in the Bible, to determine, as far as may 


en be, the motives, if such a word may be used, to which the Incarna- 


nation. —_ tion is to be assigned. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 319 
1. The relations of man to God and to the world, as laid down 1. Man, 
in Scripture, may be expressed in two brief propositions. In eee 
relation to God, man was made in His image (i). In relation to avin 
the world, man is the representative of the visible creation (ii). oat 
(i) The truth that man was ‘made in the image of God’ admits the visible 
of two distinct developments. It may be viewed (a) in regard to ae 
the individual, or (8) in regard to the race. In both respects man Sra 
was created to gain a divine ideal. It is true indeed that neither to be 
the race nor the individual can be properly considered apart: each ime 
is dependent upon the other for the attainment of its perfection. aan oO 


But much is gained both in clearness and fulness of view by con- S°ci@lly. 
sidering them separately. 
(a) It is wholly unnecessary to inquire in what exact sense (a) The 


individual 


man was ‘made in the image of God.’ We have no faculties for man. 


the investigation, There is however no authority for limiting the 
image to any particular part of his nature. For us the individual 
man in his complex being is one; and as man he was made in God’s 
image to gain His likeness. 
In this work he had constant need of divine help. As he was 
made he was not at once capable of union with God. To reach this 
In the divine 
order men are ‘first made men and then afterwards gods.’ 
If then man had fulfilled the law of his being, he would still, so Man as 


created 
far as we can see, have stood in need of a Mediator through whom needed a 


Mediator. 


consummation he required discipline and training. 


1 Trrationabiles igitur omni modo 
qui non exspectant tempus augmenti, 
et sue nature infirmitatem adscribunt 
Deo...Jam volunt similes esse factori 
Deo, et nullam esse differentiam infecti 
Dei, et nunc facti hominis, qui plus 
irrationabiles sunt quam muta ani- 
malia, Hee enim non imputant Deo, 
quoniam non homines facit ea...Nos 
enim imputamus ei, quoniam non ab 
initio Dii facti sumus, sed primo qui- 
dem homines, tune demum Dii...(Iren. 
iv. 38, 4: the whole passage is worthy 
of careful study: comp. iii. 10, 2; iii. 
19, I). 

The thought, which is startling at 
first to us, finds frequent expression in 


Athanasius: de Inc. Verbi § 51, p. 75 
αὐτὸς yap [ὁ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγος] ἐπηνθρώπη- 
σεν ἵνα ἡμεῖς θεοποιηθῶμεν- καὶ αὐτὸς 
ἐφανέρωσεν ἑαυτὸν διὰ σώματος ἵνα ἡμεῖς 
τοῦ ἀοράτου Πατρὸς ἔννοιαν λάβωμεν" καὶ 
αὐτὸς ὑπέμεινε τὴν wap ἀνθρώπων ὕβριν 
ἵνα ἡμεῖς ἀθανασίαν κληρονομήσωμεν. De 
decr. Syn. Nic. § 14, Pp. 173 ὁ λόγος 
σὰρξ ἐγένετο ἵνα...καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐκ τοῦ πνεῦ- 
ματος αὐτοῦ μεταλαβόντες θεοποιηθῆναι 
δυνηθῶμεν, ἄλλως οὐκ ἂν τούτου τυχόντες 
εἰ μὴ τὸ κτιστὸν ἡμῶμ αὐτὸς ἐνεδύσατο 
σῶμα. Compare Newman, Note on the 
Second Discourse against the Arians 
§ 21, p. 380, for other references; and 
the Index under θεοποίησις; and Suicer 
8. v. θεοποιέω. 


320 THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


the relation of fellowship with God might have been sustained, and 
deepened, and perfected. Nor is it easy to suppose that this fellow- 
ship could have been made stable and permanent in any other way 
than by the union in due time of man with God, accomplished by 
the union of man with Him Who was the Mediator between God 
and man, and in whose image man was made’. 

Treneus has given a striking expression to this truth. He starts 
indeed from the consideration of man as fallen, but his argument 
passes into an absolute form. Speaking of the necessity of the 
Incarnation he says: ‘If man had not conquered the adversary of 
‘man, the enemy would not have been justly conquered. And 
‘again, if God had not bestowed salvation, we should not have 
And if man had not been united to God, he 
For it was necessary 


‘ possessed it surely. 
‘could not have partaken of incorruption. 
‘that the Mediator of God and men by His own essential relation- 
‘ship with both should bring both together into friendship and 


‘concord, and on the one hand present man to God and on the 


‘other make God known to man®,’ 


1 This thought is clearly expressed 
by many Calvinistic theologians, 
though they do not follow it out to 
its full breadth. Hominum integro- 
rum Mediator [fuit Christus] respectu 
prime illius unionis ante lapsum, 
quia homines integri non per seipsos 
sed per Filium Dei erant Deo uniti 
et conjuncti, quamdiu ipsi visum fuit 
largiri illis gratiam persistendi in ami- 
citia cum Deo...Inde ab initio mundi 
fuit atque est inter Deum et filios Dei, 
seu creaturas rationales ad imaginem 
Dei conditas, Mediator per quem solum 
1118 statum initio habuerunt et habent 
beatitudinem, hoc est, communionem 
et fruitionem Dei tanquam summi 
boni (Polanus Syntagma, vi. 27). Com- 
pare p. 317. 

2 Tren. iii. 18, 7 El yap μὴ ἄνθρωπος 
ἐνίκησε τὸν ἀντίπαλον τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, οὐκ 
ἂν δικαίως ἐνικήθη ὁ ἐχθρός. Πάλιν τε, 
εἰ μὴ ὁ θεὸς ἐδωρήσατο τὴν σωτηρίαν, 
οὐκ ἂν βεβαίως ἔσχομεν αὐτήν. Καὶ εἰ 
μὴ συνηνώθη ὁ ἄνθρωπος τῷ θεῷ, οὐκ ἂν 
ἠδυνήθη μετασχεῖν τῆς ἀφθαρσίας. "Ἔδει 


γὰρ τὸν μεσίτην θεοῦ τε καὶ ἀνθρώπων, διὰ 
τῆς ἰδίας πρὸς ἑκατέρους οἰκειότητος, εἰς 
φιλίαν καὶ ὁμόνοιαν τοὺς ἀμφοτέρους 
συναγαγεῖν" καὶ θεῷ μὲν παραστῆσαι τὸν 
ἄνθρωπον, ἀνθρώποις δὲ γνωρίσαι τὸν θεόν. 

Compare v. 16, 2 Ἔν τοῖς πρόσθεν χρό- 
νοις ἐλέγετο μὲν κατ᾽ εἰκόνα θεοῦ γεγο- 
νέναι τὸν ἄνθρωπον, οὐκ ἐδείκνυτο δέ" ἔτι 
yap ἀόρατος ἣν ὁ λόγος, οὗ κατ᾽ εἰκόνα ὁ 
ἄνθρωπος ἐγεγόνει. διὰ τοῦτο δὴ καὶ 
τὴν ὁμοίωσιν ῥᾳδίως ἀπέβαλεν. ὁπότε 
δὲ σὰρξ ἐγένετο ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ, τὰ 
ἀμφότερα ἐπεκύρωσε' καὶ yap καὶ τὴν 
εἰκόνα ἔδειξεν ἀληθῶς, αὐτὸς τοῦτο γενό- 
μενος ὅπερ ἦν ἡ εἰκὼν αὐτοῦ" καὶ τὴν 
ὁμοίωσιν βεβαίως κατέστησε, συνεξομοιώ- 
σας τὸν ἄνθρωπον τῷ ἀοράτῳ πατρί [per 
visibile Verbum]. 

iv. 33, 4 πῶς ἄνθρωπος χωρήσει els 
θεόν, εἰ μὴ ὁ θεὸς ἐχωρήθη εἰς ἄνθρωπον; 
The form ἐχωρήθη in this connexion is 
strange (comp. iv. 38, 2). The Latin 
translation has nothing to correspond 
to it. The Greek is preserved by Theo- 
doret, Dial. ii. p. 129 (Migne Patr. Gr. 
lxxxiii. 171). 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 321 


Moreover, if we regard the predestined humanity of the Son of 
God as the archetype of humanity‘, light is thrown upon the doctrine 
of the Atonement. It becomes in this case in some degree intel- The rela- 
tion of 


ligible how Christ could fitly (if we may so speak) take man’s nature this idea 


to that 
of the 


a nature which was not alien in its idea, but one which in some ee 
ment, 


upon Him, and suffer for man, inasmuch as He took upon Himself 


mysterious sense was in its propriety partially an image of His own 
though it had fallen. 

So far then the essential constitution of man suggests at least the 
belief that the Incarnation, by which we understand in this case the 
taking of sinless and perfected humanity into God, was part of the 
divine counsel in creation. 

(0) These considerations which apply to the individual man (Ὁ) The 


human 
We cannot race. 


obtain greater weight if they are extended to the race. 
but believe that under any circumstances, and wholly apart from the 
Fall, there would have been a progress in the race, as well as in the 
individual, towards the gradual fulfilment of the idea of humanity. 
All that was potentially included in man in his various relations to 
being would have been realised in many parts. In this way the 
whole conception of humanity would have been broken up and dis- 
tributed, so to speak, through countless separate personalities. There 
would then have been need of some power by which at last all the 
scattered elements of manhood should be brought together into a 
personal unity. In other words the endeavour to follow out the 


normal development of the human race leads us to look for that 


1 Compare Tertull. de Resurr. Carn. 
6 Quodcunque enim limus exprime- 
batur Christus cogitabatur homo futu- 
rus, quod et limus, et sermo caro, 
quod et terra tune. Sic enim prefatio 
patris ad filium: Faciamus hominem 
ad imaginem et similitudinem nostram-: 
et fecit hominem Deus. Id utique 
guod finxit ad imaginem Dei fecit 
illum, scilicet Christi. Et Sermo enim 
Deus qui in effigie Dei constitutus non 
rapinam existimavit pariari Deo. Ita 
limus ille jam tunc imaginem induens 


W. J. 


Christi futuri in carne non tantum 
Dei opus erat sed et pignus. Id. adv. 
Praz. 12 Denique sequens scriptura 
distinguit inter personas: et fecit Deus 
hominem, ad imaginem Dei fecit illum. 
Cur non suam si unus qui faciebat et 
non erat ad cujus faciebat? Erat au- 
tem ad cujus imaginem faciebat, ad 
filii scilicet ; qui homo futurus certior 
et verior imaginem suam fecerat dici 
hominem qui tunc de limo formari 
habebat, imago veri et similitudo. 


21 


All the 
varieties 
of the 
race to 

be brought 
to a unity. 


The 
relation 
of Christ 
to the 
Church. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


which answers to the Incarnation, by which the completed body 
might be brought into a final unity in fellowship with God. 

For Christ, as we are taught, supplies that which gives a common 
life to all the members. He is the Head of the Body. All the dif- 
ferences of men, so far as they correspond with a true growth, are 
reconciled in Him, and shewn to be contributory to the manifesta- 
tion of His perfection’. 

In this respect the argument which was drawn from Eph. v. 31f. 
by several early writers deserves more consideration than we are at 
first inclined to give to it. The main idea in the passage seems to 
be that the Church, the representative of perfected humanity, of that 
which the race would in the end have been if sin had not inter- 
vened, is related to a Head, just as in the typical record of Creation 
woman is related to man. The Church and woman are severally re- 
garded as derived, and yet belonging to the completeness of that from 
which they are derived, and so destined finally to be restored to 
perfect fellowship with it. Man ideally is not man only but man and 
woman ; Christ, such appears to be the thought, however unfamiliar 
it may be to us, unites with the Godhead the idea of perfected 
humanity, and that not accidentally but essentially. The personal 
relation of sex regarded in typical individuals, represents, as we 
should express the view, beyond itself a corporate relation which 
exists in respect to the race. Just as the individual union is neces- 
sary for the fulfilment of the idea of woman ; so the corporate union 
is necessary for the fulfilment of the idea of humanity. Christ is the 
true Adam: the Church is the true Eve. And both these relations, 
the individual relation and the corporate relation, are independent 
of the Fall. The Fall has disturbed and disordered each, but it was 


not the occasion for the first existence of either?, 


1 Eph. i. 22 f. αὐτὸν ἔδωκε κεφαλὴν 
ὑπὲρ πάντα τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, ἥτις ἐστὶ τὸ 
σῶμα αὐτοῦ, τὸ πλήρωμα τοῦ τὰ πάντα ἐν 
πᾶσιν πληρουμένου. I cannot but be- 
lieve that in the last clause πληρουμέ- 
νου is (as elsewhere) passive, so that 
everything which is is represented as 
serving for the manifestation of the 


glory of God (Col. ii. 19), Who is ‘ful- 
filled in all things in all.’ 

2 The thought finds a confused ex- 
pression in a very remarkable passage 
of the Homily which is known as the 
Second Epistle of Clement. In this 
the writer speaks of a spiritual Church, 
corresponding to the spiritual Christ, 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 323 


So far we have regarded man only, the individual and the (ii) Man 
th - 
We venture to go yet further, and to look upon man as the eeaieiia 


of Crea- 
tion. 


(ii) 
race, 


representative of Creation. This thought appears to be distinctly 


suggested in the records of the Creation, and of the Fall, and of the 
new Creation. The dominion of man (Gen. 1, 28) was such that his 
realm shared the consequences of his sin (Gen. iii. 17). His destiny 
therefore has not yet been accomplished (Ps. viii. ; Hebr. ii. 5 ff.). 
But in its promised fulfilment lies the hope of the material world. 
For that something is in store which answers to the redemption 
of man’s body (Rom. viii. 22 ff.’). 


It will at once be obvious how this wider view of the relations of For Crea- 


" ti 5 
man to Creation tends to confirm what has been already said of the ee 


inherent fitness of the Incarnation in relation to the plan of Crea- ἘΣ 
tion, as we are enabled to look upon it. In all parts of the natural law of 
order, and not in humanity only, in the very course of progress, there co 
is constant division, dispersion, differentiation, of elements ; and at 

the same time clearer glimpses are opened of a unity to which all 

the parts appear to tend. This separation, this unity, as far as we 

can see, belong alike to the essence of things. The separation has 


been, it is true, influenced by the Fall, but, as a condition of growth, 


and of an earthly Church correspond- 
ing with the earthly Christ; and he 
finds in this relation the fulfilment of 
the words of Genesis: ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς 
Tov ἄνθρωπον ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυ τὸ ἄρσεν 
ἐστὶν ὁ Χριστός, τὸ θῆλυ ἡ ἐκκλησία 
(2 Clem. xiv.). 

Compare Hermas i. Vis. ii. 4 Τὴν 
πρεσβυτέραν παρ᾽ ἧς ἔλαβες τὸ βιβλίον, 
τίνα δοκεῖς εἶναι ; ἐγώ φημι Τὴν Σίβυλλαν. 
Πλανᾶσαι, φησίν, οὐκ ἔστι. Τὶς οὖν ἐστί; 
φημί. Ἢ ἐκκλησία, φησίν. εἶπον οὖν αὐτῷ 
Διὰ τί οὖν πρεσβυτέρα; Ὅτι, φησίν, πάντων 
πρώτη ἐκτίσθη, διὰ τοῦτο πρεσβυτέρα, 
καὶ διὰ ταύτην ὁ κόσμος κατηρτίσθη. 

1 Tren. ili, 16, 6 Unus igitur Deus 
Pater quemadmodum ostendimus, et 
unus Christus Jesus Dominus noster, 
veniens per universam dispositionem 
et omnia in semetipsum recapitulans. 
In omnibus autem est et homo, plas- 
matio Dei; et hominem ergo in semet- 


ipsum recapitulans est, invisibilis visi- 
bilis factus, et incomprehensibilis fac- 
tus comprehensibilis, et impassibilis 
passibilis, et Verbum homo, universa 
in semetipsum recapitulans: uti sicut 
in supercelestibus et spiritalibus et 
invisibilibus princeps est Verbum Dei, 
sic et in visibilibus et corporalibus prin- 
cipatum habeat, in semetipsum prima- 
tum assumens, et apponens semetip- 
sum caput ecclesie universa attrahat 
ad semetipsum apto tempore. 

Comp. Theod. Mops. fragm. Lib. 
xiv. de Incarn. (Migne Patr. Gr. lxvi. 
Ῥ. 990) οὐδὲ γὰρ ἂν ὁ θεὸς οὕτως ἁπλῶς 
καὶ ἄνευ τινὸς χρησίμου λόγου ἄνθρωπον 
μὲν ἐλάμβανε καὶ ἥνου πρὸς ἑαυτὸν προσ- 
κυνεῖσθαι παρὰ τῆς κτίσεως παρασκευάζων 
ἁπάσης, τὰς δέ γε νοητὰς φύσεις προσ- 
κυνεῖν, ἐδικαίου, εἰ μὴ τὰ περὶ αὐτὸν 
γεγονότα κοινὴ πάσης ἣν εὐεργεσία τῆς 
κτίσεως. 


21---2 


324 


2. Μο- 
tives for 
the Incar- 
nation. 


These not 
limited by 
the Fall. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


it is not due to it. The idea of the Incarnation therefore satisties 
the aspiration towards the vaster unity to which the full develop- 
ment of Creation points. The restoration of unity to man carries 


with it the promise of the restoration of unity to all finite being. 


2. If we regard the subject from the opposite point of sight 
we obtain the same general result. Reasons have been alleged for 
thinking that man’s constitution as unfallen, required the personal 
union of humanity with God for his consummation individual and 
social and for the consummation of the world through Him. It 
appears also that the Incarnation necessarily included in itself conse- 
quences which were irrespective of the Fall, and which yet, so far as 


we can see, cannot be regarded as contingent in the Divine Counsel. 


Theologians have classed the objects or results of the Incarnation 
—for in this case the motive and the effect are identical—under 
three heads, the Revelation of God, the benefit of man, the conquest 
of Satan. Of these in their essential nature the first is wholly and 
the second partly irrespective of the Fall. It is not possible upon 
reflection to exclude all other conceptions from the Incarnation ex- 
cept those of satisfaction and atonement. These thoughts naturally 
rise at once to our minds in connexion with it from the conditions of 
suffering and sin under which we live; but these conditions do not 
belong to humanity but to fallen humanity. And if the consequences 
of the Fall be set aside, there yet remain those characteristics of 
a finite nature which require what they have received from God’s 
love in the Incarnation for their true fulfilment. We must look to 
the perfection and not only to the redemption of man. The argu- 
ments which we have heard pressed on this point by many writers 
seem to me to be of very great weight. We cannot conceive that a 
being capable of knowing God and of being united with Him should 
not have been destined to gain that knowledge, to realise that union. 
We cannot suppose that the consummation of man and of humanity 
and the realisation of Christ’s kingdom which have been brought 
about by the Incarnation are dependent on the Fall: we cannot 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 325 


suppose that they could have been brought about in any other way 
than in that according to which they are now revealed to us in their 
supreme glory’. 


It will perhaps be said that the view which has been indicated No limita- 
tion of the 
So far as there is action of 
God on 
this view 
not in- 
cluded in 
Creation. 


makes the action of God dependent on creation. 
force in this argument it extends not only to the perfection of 
creation but to creation itself. The very act of Creation is a self- 
limitation of Omnipotence. And as far as we dare speculate on 
such subjects it is easier for us to suppose that the crowning act 
of love, the consummation of all finite being, was included in the one 
creative act, than that it was contingent on man’s conduct. Or to 
put the thought in another way, it is in every way more consonant 
with the idea of God’s action which is given to us in Scripture 
to suppose that the union of man with God was predestined in 
relation to man as answering to the divine idea of man, than to 
suppose that it was first designed for man as he made himself by his 
sinful self-assertion. 

And here again I would repeat that we must carefully guard the 
conception of the Incarnation, as we thus endeavour to view it in 
the absolute Divine Counsel, from every thought of humiliation. 
We must conceive, if I may so represent the idea, that in that case 
glorified humanity would have been raised up to heaven and not 


that the Son of God would have come down to earth. 


It may again be urged that this is merely speculation on matters The Gos- 


ξ 3 τς al 1 of 
too high for us where Scripture is silent. I reply that we cannot ae 
but speculate: that we are so made that we must strive after some τ 


view of the relations and end of the system in which we are placed : theory. 


1 Hippolytus, regarding the Incarna- 
tion in its actual effects, points out 
how it wrought not only the redemp- 
tion of fallen beings, but the sure 
establishment of unfallen beings. 
Man even if unfallen wouid have 
needed this divine confirmation. Hipp. 
c. Ber. et Hel. ii. (Migne Patr. Gr. x. 
Ῥ- 833) διὰ τοῦτο γέγονεν ἄνθρωπος ὁ 
τῶν ὅλων θεὸς ἵνα σαρκὶ μὲν παθητῇ πάσ- 


χων ἅπαν ἡμῶν τὸ τῷ θανάτῳ πραθὲν 
λυτρώσηται γένος, ἀπαθεῖ δὲ θεότητι 
διὰ σαρκὸς θαυματουργῶν πρὸς τὴν ἀκή- 
parov αὐτοῦ καὶ μακαρίαν ἐπαναγάγῃ 
ζωὴν ἧς ἀπέπεσεν τῷ διαβόλῳ πειθόμενος" 
καὶ τὰ κατ᾽ οὐρανοὺς ἅγια τάγματα τῶν 
νοερῶν οὐσιῶν στομώσῃ πρὸς ἀτρεψίαν 
τῷ μυστηρίῳ τῆς αὐτοῦ σωματώσεως, ἧς 
ἔργον ἡ τῶν ὅλων ἐστὶν εἰς αὐτὸν ἀνακε- 
φαλαίωσις. 


326 


The 
general 
silence of 
Scripture 
natural. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


that the advance of partial knowledge forces upon us more and more 
the duty of looking for a more comprehensive synthesis: that even 
if Scripture were silent the real question would be, Is the view 
consistent with Scripture? that Scripture gives us facts, and above 
all the one Fact, which must be for us the sovereign expression of 
the divine will; that if circumstances prompt the inquiry, we are 
bound to inquire with reverence whether that Fact illuminates the 
position which we occupy in face of the thoughts and discoveries 
of the time. The Fact is final, but the Spirit sent in Christ’s name 
enables men to see more and more of its meaning. 

Nor is the general silence of Scripture, at least so far as direct 
statements are concerned, on this absolute view of the Incarnation 
in any way surprising. The view belongs properly to an order 
which has ceased to be. The Gospel is a message to man as he 
is. It is perfectly natural therefore that Scripture should for the 
wnost part contemplate the actual state of things and speak of the 
Incarnation as dealing with man fallen. It is perfectly natural that 
the Creeds (and the same remark applies to early patristic writings) 
dealing with the actual history of the Incarnation should state that 
Christ ‘came down from heaven for us men and for our salvation.’ 
The very words ‘came down’ and all corresponding phrases belong 
exclusively to the Incarnation as the assumption of passible humanity 
in consequence of sin. But this language is in no way inconsistent 
with the belief that what was accomplished under certain conditions 
due to sin would have been accomplished otherwise if man had 
remained sinless. There is force in Osiander’s remark! that the 
two phrases ‘for us’ and ‘for our salvation’ express two distinct 
ideas. And yet more: the revelation of love involved in the divine 
purpose is included in the revelation of love given in the divine act. 
And while we cling most firmly to the ideas of ‘salvation,’ of ‘the 
seeking and saving that which was lost,’ we must also bear in 
mind that ‘salvation’ is far more than deliverance from the con- 


sequences of evil. It expresses also the final preservation of that 


1 See p. 315. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 327 


which truly belongs to the saved ; to the fulness of human nature as 
well as to the condition of fallen nature. There is ‘a making 
perfect’ which is correlative with ‘salvation',’ 

But in one passage at least we seem to be admitted by St Paul 
to look upon the Truth as it is in the divine counsel with regard to 
Creation and re-creation. In Col. i. 13 ff. he presents a view of the 
work of ‘the Son of God’s love’ in the creation, preservation 
(ἔκτισται : ἐν αὐτῷ συνέστηκεν, 16), redemption, consummation (v. 20) 
of finite being. The whole work is fulfilled by one Person (13—20), 
who is before Creation, and is also the source of peace ‘through the 
Blood of His Cross.’ This view is satisfied by the theological con- 
ception that the personality of Christ is in His Divine Nature. But 
at the same time His human nature is taken into account (v. 19 f.) ; 
and when He is spoken of as the ‘image of the invisible God,’ He 
is presented as the archetype of humanity in creation even as He is 
also ‘the firstborn from the dead.’ 


Doubts however may still remain as to the interpretation of this a 
mysterious passage. But at least it cannot be said that a belief in Gospel of 
the absolute purpose of the Incarnation is at variance with Scripture. ing 
Nor does it in any way derogate from the infinite love of God. If ert a 


it is ‘most consonant to the judgment of reason’ it seems to be also for man’s 
‘most consonant to the piety of faith.’ It adds to every motive of ere 
devout gratitude which is suggested by the circumstances of the 
Incarnation, a further motive of gratitude in the contemplation of 
that primal love which the selfwill of man could not thwart. For 
if the common view moves us to devotion as we look at the indi- 
vidua]l—the one sheep which was lost—this view teaches us to draw 
in addition new causes for fuller adoration from the thought of the 
whole—of the ninety and nine who have not strayed—who are no 
less near to the great Shepherd’s love. Nothing is lost, and for those 
who cannot but turn from time to time with anxious questionings 
from the contemplation of the vastness, the complexity, the contra- 


1 The thought of τελείωσις is charac- the Hebrews. Comp. John xvii. 23; 
teristic of St John and the Epistle to Hebr. vii. 11 and notes. 


328 


A practical 
doctrine. 


THE GOSPEL OF CREATION. 


dictions, the earnest expectation, as we are encouraged to call it, of 
the world, to Holy Scripture, much is gained by the thought that 
from the first it was the purpose of God to gather up all things in 
the Son of His love’. 

The subject on which we have touched is not, I believe, a mere 
matter of speculation, or a curious fancy of a past age. If I had so 
regarded it, I should not have thought it fitting to give here sketches 
of reasoning which must in many cases appear strange and obscure. 
But I have chosen to dwell upon it because I think that I have 
found in the opinions which I have ventured to maintain, support 
and light in the face of great problems which seem likely to grow 
more urgent every day. The thought that the Incarnation, the union 
of man with God, and of creation in man, was part of the divine 
purpose in Creation, opens unto us, as I believe, wider views of the 
wisdom of God than we commonly embrace, which must react upon 
life. 

Tt presents to us the highest manifestation of divine love as 
answering to the idea of man, and not as dependent upon that which 
lay outside the Father’s Will. 

It reveals to us how the divine purpose is fulfilled in unex- 
pected and unimaginable ways in spite of man’s selfishness and sin. 

It indicates, at least, how that unity to which many physical and 
historical researches point is not only to be found in a dispersive 
connexion of multitudinous parts, but is summed up finally in one 
life. 

It helps us to feel a little more, and this is the sum of all, 
what the Incarnation is, what it involves, what it promises, what it 
enforces, what it inspires; that Fact which we strive to believe, and 
which is ever escaping from us; that Fact which sets before us with 


invincible majesty Christ’s ‘power to subdue all things to Himself*’ 


1 Comp. Eph. iii. ο ff.; iv. 10. 3 Phil. iii. 21. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY 
TO ART. 


ἐκ μεγέθογο καλλονῆς KTICMATON ἀνδλόγως 
ὁ γενέοιογργός ἀὐτῶν θεωρεῖτοι. 
' Wisd. xiii. δ. 


IL. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


The relation of Christianity to Art a practical question for the student of 


the New Testament. 


Apparent contrast. 


I. 


Man made to seek beauty. 

Nature needs interpretation. 

Moral importance of the interpretation. 

Sense needs discipline. 

Art not directly recognised in the New Testament. 

The use of Art in the Old Testament not a sufficient sanction. 


The principle of reconciliation. 


Contrast of Shemitic and Hellenic tendencies. 


1. 


No free pursuit of imitative Art among the Jews. 

Art consecrated. 

Imitative Art treated as absolute by the Greeks. 

Necessary decline of Greek Art. 

Christianity necessarily antagonistic to classical Art in the Apostolic 
age. 


The task of Christian Art. 
Early literary evidence as to Christian Art. 


J. 


Tertullian: Clement Alex.: Origen. 
Painting. 
Cemeteries at Rome. 
Naples. 
The Synod of Elvira. 
The judgment of Eusebius Cas. 
Change of feeling in the Fifth Century. 
Paulinus of Nola. 
Gregory of Nyssa: Asterius: Nilus: Augustine. 
Sculpture. 
Scanty remains. 
Architecture. 
The Church of Paulinus at Tyre. 


of Constantine at Jerusalem. 
Mosaies. 


332 THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


Domestic Art: gems. 
Characteristics of early Christian Art. 
Conventional in subject. 


treatment. 
Symbolic. 
Reserved. 
Treatment of the Passion. 
Examples. 
Slab at Wirksworth. 
Joyful. 


III. The true relation of Christianity to Art. 
Slowly realised. 
Controversy as to the appearance of the Lord. 
Art aims at the divine ideal. 
Christianity does not alter the range of Art. 
Unequal advances of different Arts, 
Disturbing effect of the Renaissance. 
The Evangelic sign. 


IV. Love the guide of Art. 

Browning’s analysis of the grounds of failure in Art. 
Fra Lippo Lippi. 
Andrea Del Sarto. 
Pictor Ignotus. 

Not ‘of the world.’ 

Value of artistic discipline. 

The artist interprets and embodies. 

Peril of realistic Art in sacred subjects, 

Illustrations from treatment of the Madonna: the Crucifixion. 

Art ministerial: not an end. 

Christian Art a necessary expression of Christian Faith. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


No student of the apostolic writings can fail to find himself "ἄν ΤῊΝ 

sometimes confronted by the question Does the teaching of the New ity leave 
Testament cover all the interests of human life? and more particu- ace oa 
larly Does the New Testament, does Christianity as laid down there 
in its broad outlines, leave scope for the free development of Art? 
This latter question deserves consideration. It is not enough that 
it should have been practically answered by general consent: the 
answer thus given includes many elements which tend at least to 
create misgivings as to its soundness ; and it is, superficially at least, 
in conflict with the most prominent utterances of early Christian 
feeling. The main issue is not whether the Christian spirit encou- 
rages that temper which is the strength of the artist, but whether 
it recognises his work as contributory to the fulfilment of man’s 
destiny. There can be no doubt that truth, sympathy, reverence, 
will characterise all effort which deserves the name of Christian ; 
but it is not at once obvious that in the face of the overwhelming 
moral problems of life Christian effort can be properly directed to 
the pursuit of Art. 

Thus there is the suggestion if not the distinct appearance of a 
conflict between man’s constitution and the Gospel. He is born 
with artistic instincts and powers; and these, it may be alleged, are 
not directly taken into account by the records of the Faith. 

The apparent contrast requires to be stated a little more in Apparent 


detail contrast. 
etail. 
On the one side it is certain that Art corresponds with essential 1. - so 
ne ag constitu- 
parts of our nature. Men universally seek particular combinations ted as to 


- - Kk 
of form, colour, sound, and the pleasure which these give can be ee 


334 THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


deepened and extended through the study of the principles by which 
they are ruled. Men can be trained to a keener and finer perception 
of beauty. There is then here εν force of influence which cannot be 


overlooked in the discipline of life. 


External And more than this, the complex scene in which we are placed 
nature " 

needs requires to be revealed to us. We are not at once able to enter into 
a the manifold aspects of Nature which we can recognise when they 


are pointed out. There is something of disorder and disproportion 
in the impression which we first receive from the world about us. 
The ‘form’ of things needs some interpretation ; and the particular 
interpretation which we adopt has helped and will help to make us 
what we are and what we shall be. 


Ea ei For the physical effects which Art produces exercise a profound 
pretation ines ᾿ : 

of nature moral and spiritual influence upon character. It is unnecessary to 
by Art h 2 : 

a pewertal attempt to make any comparison of the relative power of external 


moral nature and society upon the education of the soul. It is enough 


ae that both have their due office in moulding the ideal man. Re- 
move the discipline of one or the other, and the man is weaker and 
poorer however successfully he cultivates the self-centred virtues on 
which he has concentrated himself. It may be necessary to ‘cut off 
the right hand’ or to ‘ pluck out the right eye,’ but he who is forced 
to do so enters into life ‘ maimed.’ 

Sense This expressive image seems to carry with it a full recognition of 

ae, Σ the manifold activities of eye and hand, of the power of seeing 

discipline; beauty and setting it forth, as belonging to the completeness of 
man. And if under the actual conditions of life it is through sense, 
which Art uses as its organ, that the most obvious and universal 
dangers come to men, the natural conclusion seems to be that this 
fact shews convincingly the paramount importance of the study of 
Art. In this region we need peculiarly to be trained in order that 
we may enjoy rightly ; and not be called upon to sacrifice that 
which was capable of ministering to a richer service. 

τι Ἴδη Art Such reflections, indicated in the briefest summary, serve to shew 

rectly _ that Art justly claims a permanent place in the highest training of 

recognised Ξ ie 


inN.T. men; but on the other hand it may be urged that, with the excep- 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 335 


tion of music, there is no recognition of the office of Art in the New 
Testament. One or two illustrations from engraving (Hebr. i. 3) or 
painting (Hebr. viii. 5 ; x. 1) are all that it contains. The imagery 
of the Apocalypse—as the cubic city (Apoc. xxi. 16)—is symbolic 


and not pictorial. 


And not only so, but it seems as if representative Art were eae 
distinctly condemned. It is difficult to give any sense to ‘the desire excluded. 
of the eyes,’ which St John declares to be ‘ not of the Father but of 
the world’ (1 John ii. 16), which shall not include works of sculp- 
ture and painting ; and at first sight the revelation of the transitori- 
ness of that out of which they spring appears to carry with it the 
sentence of their rejection. 

Nor. can any stress be laid upon the partial recognition of the ΠΝ use of 
service of Art in the Old Testament. The system of the old Cove- 0.T. not 

- ἢ asufiicient 
nant was essentially external. It spoke through symbols. But it recog. 
might be argued, not unreasonably, that, as Christianity is essentially nition. 
spiritual, it is likely that it would be independent of all illustrations 
from Art. 


These are the elements of the contrast which have to be recon- fe 
ciled. The reconciliation, to anticipate the result of our inquiry, recon- 
lies in the central message of Christianity ‘the Word became flesh.’ a 
By that fact the harmony between the seen and the unseen which 
had been interrupted was potentially restored. Creation in all its 
parts was made known as a revelation of Him through whom it was 
called into being. But the reconciliation here as elsewhere lies in 
transfiguration. The passage to life is through death. The old 
had to pass away that the new might find its proper place. This 
truth has even now not been fully mastered; but it will be seen 
more clearly if we first consider the position of Art in relation to 
Christianity in the apostolic age (1), and the character of Christian 
Art in the first four centuries (11), and then attempt to determine 
the relation of Christianity to Art (11), and the peculiar office of 
Art (Iv). 


336 THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


Ι. 
Contrast The position of the early Christian teachers towards Art was 
he determined under two powerful and conflicting influences. In no 
rate other region of human activity were the Shemitic and Hellenic 
cies. tendencies more directly at variance. Each bore witness to ἃ partial 


truth; and in the apostolic age each had reached its complete 
development. 


t. Nofree For the Jews imitative Art had practically no public existence. 


Galles, In the absence of satisfactory evidence it is impossible to say how 


Arts 
among the 


Jews. But in spite of the very narrow range within which Jewish Art was 


far Architecture and Music found free and characteristic expression. 


confined it embodied a principle which enters into the life of Art. 
The commandment which forbade the making of graven image or 
likeness was not observed in the Sanctuary itself. By this exception 
it was made evident that the enactment was directed against acci- 
dental abuses of imitative Art and not against the Art itself. At 
the same time the manner in which Art was employed served to 
embody another thought. The description of the decorations of the 
Tabernacle and of the Temple brings out plainly the idea that repre- 
sentations of outward things, and the manifold combination of mate- 
rials, which found place there, were designed to suggest more than 
the simple figure or effect. Whatever there was of grandeur or 
beauty in ‘the ordinances of divine service’ pointed beyond itself. 
Natural forms and elements were used to indicate the unseen. How 
this could be is still powerfully shewn in the works of Egyptian Art, 
which constrain the spectator to rise beyond that which he looks 
upon to something which can find no adequate expression externally. 
The figures of gods and men alike—Pasht or Rameses—are above 
all things symbols of character. They cannot be taken simply as 
efforts to present direct and complete portraitures of the beings 
whom they call up before the soul. Later experience indeed proved 
that there were possibilities of deep corruption in the promiscuous 


use of such images of the mysteries of life as were presented in the 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 337 


accompaniments of Egyptian worship. The conception was noble 
but it was unfitted for common use. So it was that the sacred 
legislation of Israel kept the conception and guarded it jealously. 

The employment of the symbolic figures in the sanctuary of the Art conse- 
Temple, by emphasizing this exception to the general law', kept the ae 
Jew from the desecration of the symbol, and preserved for him in 

its purity the thought which it enshrined. He learnt from the 

records of the Old Testament that it was the Divine will that in the 
unapproachable darkness of the Holy of Holies the costliest works of 

Art should render service before the revealed Presence of the Lord. 

No human eye could rightfully ever again trace the lineaments of 

those cherubim and palm-trees and open flowers when they were 

once placed in the oracle, but it was enough to know that they were 

there. In no other way could the Truth be more eloquently or 
solemnly enforced that the end of Art is to witness to the inner life 

of Nature and to minister to God. The repetition of the forms in 

the Holy place kept the memory of them fresh in the minds of the 

priests*. Their significance could not be mistaken. By that offering 

of the best which he could command simply for the divine glory 

Solomon declared to his people for all time the consecration of Art, 

and he declared not obscurely that it is the office of Art to reveal 

the meaning of that which is the object of sense. Circumstances 
delayed for ages the fruitfulness of the idea; but it remained and 
remains still; and few can think of all that was implied by the 
adornment of that august chamber lighted only by the splendour of 
_ a manifested Presence of God or the glow of the kindled incense 
(Apoc. v. 8) without feeling that it has a lesson for those to whom 
Art is appointed work. Philosophers and poets have dwelt often 
upon the veiled statue at Sais: there is an open secret in the sacred 
gloom of the Holy of Holies more sublime and more inspiring. 


1 The twelve oxen which supported 
the Molten Sea in Solomon’s Temple 
(1 K. vii. 25; 2 Chron. iv. 4 f.; Jer. 
lii. 20) are a perplexing exception to 
the law. The twelve lions on the steps 
of the royal throne (τ K. x. 18 ff. ; 
2 Chron. ix. 18 f.) form a corresponding 


W. J. 


exception in the civil use of Art: comp. 
Jos. Antt. viii. 7. 3. The Brazen Ser- 
pent was a work of a wholly different 
order; as also was ‘the Teraphim’ of 
David (1 Sam. xix. 13). 

2 According to 2 Chron. iii. 14, 
cherubim were wrought on the veil. 


22 


338 


2. Imita- 
tive Art 
treated as 
absolute 
by the 
Greeks. 


The neces- 
savy 

decline of 
Greek Art. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


The Jewish repression of imitative Art, which the Law still hal- 
lowed for the highest service, corresponded with the spiritual con- 
ception of God which was the endowment of His ‘people’. Spiritual 
Religion could not at this stage of its development admit the habi- 
tual use of painting or sculpture. With the Greeks on the other 
hand imitative Art was the characteristic embodiment of the Nature 
worship which underlay their life. The form of beauty was for 
them not the symbol but the direct representation of the godlike. 
The statue was the final expression of the artist’s thought, and his 
consummate skill enabled the spectator to rest in it. Humanity 
was made the measure of the divine; and under these conditions 
anthropomorphism became a fatal temptation. At the same time 
Greek Art, if premature and perilous in regard to the complete 
spiritual training of man, witnessed to a part of the truth affirmed 
in the record of Creation which is most commonly forgotten. The 
form of man, the visible expression of what he is essentially embodied 
under the conditions of time, answers to ‘the image of God’ in which 
he was made. So far the Greek was right in seeking for traits of 
divinity in human beauty. The source of error, from which flowed 
the stream of later corruption, was that he regarded these as fixed 
and final. He failed, necessarily failed in the way of nature, to 
claim recognition for the fulness of the truth that man made in the 
image of God has to grow into His likeness: that all that is noblest 
in form or present embodiment is preparatory to something yet 
unseen and higher: that Art in its greatest achievements must be 
prophetic, must not rest in a victory but reveal that which is unat- 
tained’. 

It would be difficult to overrate the skill with which Greek 
sculpture of the best period represents strength in majestic repose, 
and feeling under sovereign control ; but all, so to speak, lies within 
the figure before us. ‘The Gods have come down to us in the like- 
ness of men’; and we look no further. At first the spiritual, reli- 


1 This is only one application of the _ the recognition of this truth which the 
general law that man cannot find Book illustrates from many sides. 
rest in the finite. The key to the Comp. Eecles. iii. τα. 
understanding of Ecclesiastes lies in 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 339 


gious, element is supreme, as in all living Art; but with the decay 
of faith that which is sensuous usurps the place of the spiritual, and 
Art which takes man as the standard of the divine cannot but fall. A 
single illustration will be sufficient to indicate my meaning. This is 
given in a crucial shape by the treatment of Aphrodite in the earlier 
and later schools. The physical beauty of the Medicean Venus has 
lost all the pure sovereign majesty of the Aphrodite of Melos, which 
is worthy to be an ideal of ‘woman before the Fall’. 
It is unnecessary to trace the decay of Greek Art. It retained 
to the last the gift of physical beauty, but in the apostolic age it had 
become the servant of the luxury of the Empire. Starting from a 
human ideal it became enslaved to man. So far as it had a place in 
popular worship it brought down the divine to the level ofa cor- 
rupt life. 
This being so the antagonism of early Christians to contemporary Christian- 
Art was necessarily essential and absolute. Before Art could be eg aa 


tially an- 
placed in its true position there was need of a complete change of tagonisti 
centre. For this the stern discipline of Judaism had made provision. it was. 
The lesson of consecration which had been kept in silent witness for 

long ages could be applied now that ‘the Word had become flesh.’ 

By that fact a new meaning was given to the beauty which the 

Greek artist had felt for, and an immeasurable scope was opened for 

the ministry of nature to God which the Jewish legislator had 
declared in symbols. But death is the condition of resurrection. 

There is indeed a continuity through death ; but a formal severance 


from the past was the prelude to the new birth of Christian Art. 


11. 


It will be seen from what has been already said that Christianity ae be 

f is- 

had to recognise and reconcile the partial and contrasted aspects of a es 
imitative Art which had found expression in Judaism and Hellenism. 


Christian Art embodies the twofold conception of the spiritual destiny 


1 Kraus (F. X.), Die Christliche Kunst, x. 22. 
22---2 


340 THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


of the visible, and of a spiritual revelation through the visible. The 
central fact of the Christian Faith gives ὦ solid unity to both 
truths. 


fulfilled The realisation of such an idea of Art can of necessity only come 


HON slowly and through the course of life, not by any definite and con- 
scious effort but in the gradual conquest of humanity. The begin- 
ning was made when St Paul established Christian Churches in 
Ephesus, Athens, Corinth, and Rome. The end is still far off, even 
if it has come from age to age more clearly into view. When the 
Church first appeared openly in the Empire it had already the out- 
lines of a system of Art which had been drawn in the times of dark- 
ness and suffering. In the first stage of such a progress the inspiring 
thought is supreme: the perfection of form comes later. 

It is however extremely difficult to trace the course of Christian 
The literary evidence is extremely 


Scanty Art in the ante-Nicene age. 


literary 


evidence. scanty; and it naturally deals for the most part with the dangers 


and abuses of popular Art. Even in the present age little could be 

gathered as to the place which is occupied by Art in ordinary 

Christian life from the works of theological controversy and general 
Tertullian. instruction. But the stern warnings of a man like Tertullian 
are evidently directed against influences and practices which he 
felt to be powerful if not dominant. Christian artists did not 
scruple to continue their profession even when they were admitted 
to the ministry’. The painter Hermogenes is condemned for the use 
It 


may also be fairly concluded from the denunciations of female 


which he made of his art, but the art itself is not proscribed*. 


luxury that other adornments of life besides rich dresses and jewels 
found admission into Christian households ; and excess and extrava- 
gance imply a temperate use. It is also of interest to notice that 


Tertullian mentions incidentally ‘paintings on chalices’*, and in 


1 Tertull. de idol. 3 ff., adleguntur 
in ordinem ecclesiasticum  artifices 
idolorum. Comp. de spectac. 23. A 
Christian sculptor is represented at 
his work on a sarcophagus assigned by 
De’ Rossi to the third century. See 
Northcote and Brownlow, ii. p. 236. 


The subject was first engraved by 
Fabretti Inser. Ant. N. cii. p. 587, who 
describes the sarcophagus as ‘ex ce- 
meterio Helene.’ 
3 Tertull. adv. Hermog. i. pingit illi- 
cite, that is, by painting pagan subjects. 
3 de Pudic. 6. 7 picture calicum, 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 341 


especial the image of ‘the Shepherd,’ which he speaks of as a usual 
subject". 

The scanty notices of Christian Art at Alexandria are of the same Clement 
The language of Clement shews αὐ πω 


clearly that many Christians did not scruple to wear heathen gems ; 


character as those in Tertullian. 


and when he defines the subjects which might rightly be admitted 
in consideration of their typical significance, he accepts a principle 
which is capable of a very wide application’. 

At the same time it is evident from Origen’s eloquent vindica- Origen. 
tion of the spiritual service of Christians—the spiritual altar, and 
sacrifices and images of God—that no religious use was as yet pub- 

Nor can it be doubted that the feeling 
of the great teachers of the African Churches was decidedly adverse 
to the pursuit of Art*. The influence of Judaism was so far prevail- 


ing®. 


licly made of imitative Art®. 


Local circumstances probably in this case checked what might 
have been expected to be the natural result of Alexandrine thought. 

The ‘position of the Italian, and specially of the Roman Church, The 
seems to have been somewhat different. Among the earliest Italian i ἘΣ 
converts were members of noble families who brought with them 
the influence of cultivated taste, and at once found a place for the 
ministry of Art. But here again the evidence is limited in range. 
It is derived almost exclusively from paintings in the Catacombs, and 
mainly from the Catacombs of Rome; so that the simplest remains 
of Christian Art are necessarily confined in scope. They throw no 
light upon its domestic use, nor do they furnish any measure of its 
actual extent in subject or in prosecution. Moreover many of the 
paintings have been retouched at later times and some which are 
commonly reckoned among the earliest are of uncertain antiquity. 


In spite of these drawbacks however the paintings in the Cata- fo 


1 id. 6. τὸ pastor quem in calice de- 
pingis. 

2 Clem. Alex. Ped. iii. 11, § 59, p- 
289 P. : 

3 Orig. adv. Cels. viii. 17 ff. Comp. 
de Orat. 17. 

1 Clem. Alex. Protr. i. § 62, p. 54 P. 

5 In this connexion the comment of 
Eusebius on the group at Cexsarea Phi- 


lippi which was supposed to represent 
the healing of the woman with the issue 
of blood is interesting. It was not sur- 
prising, he remarks, that men of Gentile 
origin should shew their respect in 
this way for the benefits they had re- 
ceived; and he adds that they had also 
pictures ‘of Paul and Peter and in fact 
of Christ Himself’ (H. E. vii. 18, 3). 


342 


Cemetery 
of Domi- 
tilla. 


Cata- 
combs 

of St 
Januarius 
at Naples. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


combs appear to give a fair representation of the character and 
spirit of Christian Art in Italy. They extend in date over the 
whole history of the early Church, though the earliest works are 
very few, from the beginning of the second century onwards, and 
include works of the greatest rudeness and of high artistic merit. 
The earliest Roman example which is known, the decorations of 
the most ancient part of the cemetery which bears the name of 
Flavia Domitilla, are, as it appears, a unique monument of the 
primitive patrician Church of the Imperial City. In this case it 
may be supposed that the converts had the means for readily 
securing the services of a good artist, and an impartial judge pro- 
nounces the work to be such as would not discredit a painter of the 
best age’. Both in general style and subject these decorations 
closely resemble contemporary pagan works, but there are sufficient 
traces of characteristic subjects to establish their Christian origin’®. 
The decorations of the Catacombs of St Januarius at Naples 
and of chambers in the cemetery of St Callixtus at Rome are even 
more completely classical in treatment. The artist acting under 
Christian instruction has followed as far as he could the custom of 
his time, using freely conventional ornaments, birds and flowers and 
masks, which were consistent with Christian feeling, and introducing 


subjects which marked the faith of those for whom he worked’. 


1 Mommsen, Cont. Rev. May 1871, 
p. 170. 

3 Northcote and Brownlow, ii. 120 ff. 
Garrucci, Storia dell’ Arte Cristiana 
I. 19. 

3 Schultze, Die Katakomben, go ff.; 
Garrucci, Tavv. go—98. 

Northcote and Brownlow, ii. pp. 
18 ff. Garrucci, Τὰν. 26. Compare Gar- 
rucci, Tavv. 13, 20, 37, 38, 88 for other 
examples of a classical type, and the 
beautiful pagan decorations of the 
tomb in the Via Latina (Parker, 
Tombs, pl. xiv. ff.). 

The following classical subjects may 
be specially noticed : 

OrpHEUS. 

8. Domitilla, Northcote and Brown- 
low, p. 31. 


5. Callixtus, North. and Br. Pl. 
xvili. 2 (as Good Shepherd). 

Bottavi, xxi. 

The figure occurs also on a Lamp. 
D.C.A. 922. 

PsYcHE. 

S. Domitilla, North and Br. 33; 
Schultze, Die Katakomben, 98. 

S. Gennaro, Naples. Schultze, Tab. 
v.; id. Die Kat. s. 93. 

Compare North. and Br. p. 239 (sar- 
cophagus). 

Droscurt. : 

Arles; sarcophagus. Le Blant, Les 
sarc. chrét. d' Arles xxiii. 

Uxysses and the Sirens. 

Crypt of Lucina: sarcophagus: North. 
and Br. p. 240. 

A very remarkable series of scenes 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 343 


The other examples of painting in the Roman Catacombs are of Other 
examples. 


But the 


Christians used as 


inferior artistic merit, being provided by poorer converts. 
same general features are preserved throughout. 
far as they could the resources of popular art, and even adopted 
some current subjects which were capable of a Christian interpreta- 
tion. There was no chasm of separation between Christianity and 

Art except that which was fixed by the ordinary subservience of 

Art to idolatrous purposes’. 

At the beginning of the fourth century, when the Christian The canon 
Society had emerged from obscurity and begun to erect dignified ora 
places for worship, it was natural that Christians should introduce 
into their churches the Art which had decorated their tombs*. The 
famous Canon of the Synod of Elvira was evidently not directed 
against a prospective or imaginary danger, but against an actual and 
probably a growing practice. There can be no real doubt as to |its 
meaning, whatever opinion may be held as to its wisdom and its 
authority. The Synod absolutely forbids the painting of pictures on 
the walls of churches, in order to guard against the representation 


of the objects of worship’. 


from the Gospel History is found in 
the Catacomb of Pretextatus. They 
are unfortunately only imperfectly 
known. From the drawings published 
by Garrucci, they appear to represent 
(1) Christ and the woman of Samaria ; 
(2) The healing of the woman with the 
Issue; (3) The Baptism. The last sub- 
ject is debated, but De’ Rossi’s idea 
that it represents the striking of the 
Lord with the reed is wholly at vari- 
ance with the cycle of subjects in early 
Art, and with the appearance of the 
Dove in the picture. 

The drawing seems to be singularly 
good; and the figure of the Lord is of 
a youthful classical type. Schultze, Die 
Kat. 145; North. and Br. 143 ff. 

Schultze points out that Christian 
artists borrowed ornamental figures 
from classical myths which embodied 
beliefs about the dead: a. a. O. 98 ff. 

1 B.g. Garrucci, Tavv. 8,12. None of 
the groups of figures seem to shew real 
artistic merit, unless it be the Ma- 


Primitive feeling shrank, most justly, I 


donna in the Cemetery of Priscilla as 
interpreted in Northcote and Brown- 
low, ii. pl. vii.; yet contrast the photo- 
graph in Parker’s Catacombs, pl. ii. 

The marvellously beautiful group of 
the Shepherd and Sheep in the tomb 
of Statilius Taurus (B.c. 30) is wholly 
unapproached by any Christian work. 
Parker, Tombs in and near Rome, pl. 
xix. 

There are examples of decorations 
in Jewish and Mithraic tombs closely 
analogous to those of the Christian 
tombs: Garrucci, Tavv. 493 ff. 

2 Comp. Thackeray, Prudentius, pp. 
lii. ff. It is interesting to notice the 
feeling for Art in Italy (Imola, Rome, 
Milan). 

3 Conc, Illib. Can. 36. Ne picture 
in ecclesia fiant. Placuit picturas in 
ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod coli- 
tur et adoratur in parietibus depinga- 
tur. Comp. Dale, Synod of Elvira, p. 
289 0. 

The Canon is most strangely quoted 


344 


The 
judgment 
of Euse- 
bius. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


believe, from the portraiture of Divine Persons. Perhaps there 
were already symptoms that this reserve was likely to be broken. 
So it seemed better to exclude pictures from the churches altogether 
than to run the risk of injuring the sensibility of faith. 

There was perhaps something of the sternness of African Chris- 
tianity in the Canon of Elvira. It may have been called for by 
peculiar local perils. It is therefore of more interest to notice a 
similar expression of feeling from an opposite quarter. This is found 
in a letter addressed by Eusebius of Caesarea to the Empress Con- 
stantia, which was brought forward at the second Council of Nicwa. 
In this Eusebius seems to speak according to the general feeling of 
the time. The empress had requested a likeness (εἰκών) of Christ. 
What do you mean by a likeness of Christ? is the answer of Eusebius. 
Not of course the image of Him as He is truly and unchangeably ; 
nor yet of His human nature as it has been glorified, of which the 
overpowering splendour of the Transfiguration offered some pledge 
and likeness. It must then be an image of the frail mortal flesh 
which He bore before His Ascension. But such images are forbidden 
by the Mosaic Law. They are nowhere to be found in churches; 
and it is notorious that with us alone they are forbidden. ‘Some 
‘poor woman’, he goes on to say, ‘brought to me two painted 
‘figures, like philosophers, and ventured to say that they represented 
‘Paul and the Saviour ; I do not know on what ground. But to save 
‘her and others from offence, I took them from her and kept them 
‘by me, not thinking it right in any case that she should exhibit 
‘them further (εἰς ἑτέρους ὅλως ἐκφέρειν), that we may not seem like 
‘idolaters to carry our God about in an image.’ The images of 
Simon Magus and Mani may be worshipped by their followers, 
‘But such objects are forbidden us. Since we confess that our 
‘Saviour is God and Lord we prepare ourselves to see Him as God, 
‘using all zeal to purify our own hearts, that if so be when purified 
‘we may see Him. For Blessed are the pure in heart because they 


by Northcote and Brownlow (ii. p. 4) | worshipped and adored to be painted 
as ‘one which forbad ‘pictures to be on the walls.’ 
placed in a church, or that which is 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


‘shall see God. And if in addition to this hope (ἐκ περιουσίας) before 
‘that vision which shall be “ face to face” you set high value on the 
‘images of the Saviour, what better artist can there be than the 
‘God-Word Himself?” 

Such judgments were however unable to stem the tide of popular 
feeling which soon set in. The revolution in the Empire, which was 
marked and crowned by the conversion of Constantine, introduced 
new and perilous elements into the Christian body. The intense 
spirituality of the first ages was lost. Paganism passed not yet 
wholly conquered under the yoke of the Church. Within less than 
a century the representations of sacred scenes obtained for good and 
evil a recognised place in Christian sanctuaries. The innovation 
was not accomplished without resistance. The familiar anecdote of 
Epiphanius ( 402) is a kind of summary of the controversy. This 
zealous and rigid bishop when visiting a village church in Palestine 
found there a veil ‘bearing a fanciful image of Christ (imaginem 
‘quasi Christi) or of some Saint’, for this detail he could not 
remember. He at once tore it asunder, and ordered the guardians 
of the church where it hung to use it for the shroud of a pauper. 
Nor was any further remonstrance made than that he should supply 
a new one, which he did through the Bishop of Jerusalem, begging 
him to warn the priest in charge of the church not to hang there 
veils ‘which are contrary to the Christian religion’.’ 

But in spite of such isolated action, and the traditional practice 
by which it was supported, pictures found a recognised place in 
sacred buildings even in the lifetime of Epiphanius. Three illustra- 
tions will be sufficient to shew how far their use was extended in 
the West and in the East. Paulinus (+ 431), who was a scholar of 
Ausonius and of consular rank, devoted himself and his fortune to 
the service of the Church. He took for his special hero Felix, a 
martyr of Nola, whose grave he decorated with noble buildings 
while he celebrated his praises in a long series of poems. In one of 

1 Euseb. Ep. ad Const. Migne, Pa- 2 Epiph. Epist. ad Joann. Hier. § ix. 


trol. Gr. xx. 1515 ff. Comp. H.E. vii. (iii. 390 ed. Migne). 
18, 3 quoted above p. 341. 


345 


A revolu- 
tion of 
feeling. 


Paulinus. 


346 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


these he describes in some detail the pictures with which he had 
adorned the cloister of the church. The series included the events 
of the history of the Pentateuch, Joshua and Ruth*. By means of 
these representations he hoped to attract and instruct the crowds of 
ignorant rustics who visited the shrine of St Felix’. Each scene 
had, as he describes it, a certain fitness for enforcing some particular 
lesson, the new creation, the offering of Isaac, the continence of 
Joseph, the overthrow of Pharaoh‘, the separation of Ruth and 
Orpah*®. He admits that the experiment was an unusual one‘; 
and it does not appear that he introduced into his decorations any 
scenes from the Gospel history. His language indeed implies that 
he shared to some extent the feeling expressed by Eusebius as to 


representations of the Lord’. 


1 xxvii. (De S. Felice carm. natal. Agrestum caperet fucata coloribus 
ix.) 511 ff. umbra, 
Nune volo picturas fucatis agmine Que super exprimitur titulis ut lit- 
longo tera monstret 
Porticibus videas, paulumque supina Quod manus explicuit... 
fatiges id. 580 ff. 
Colla, reclinato dum perlegis omnia 4 De genesi, precor, hunc orandi col- 
vultu. lige sensum, 
3 Qui videt hec vacuis agnoscens vera Ne maneam terrenus Adam... 
figuris Hostia viva Deo tanquam puer of- 
Non vacua fidam sibi pascet imagine ferar Isac... 
mentem. Sit mihi castus amor, sit et horror 
Omnia namque tenet serie pictura amoris iniqui... 
fideli Sit mihi ab Aegypto bonus exitus... 
Que senior scripsit per quinque vo- id. 607 ff. 
lumina Moses, 5 Nonne, precor, toto manet hee dis- 
Que gessit Domini signatus nomine cordia mundo, 
Tesus... Parte sequente Deum, vel parte 
Jam distinguentem modico Ruth ruente per orbem? id. 537 f. 
tempora libro, ὁ Forte requiratur quanam ratione 
Tempora Judicibus finita et Regibus gerendi 
orta, Sederit hee nobis sententia pingere 
Intentis transcurre oculis: brevis ista sanctas 
videtur Raro more domos animantibus ad- 
Historia, et magni signat mysteria simulatis. id. 542 ff. 
belli... id. 314 ff. 7 Hac tibi, Christe Deus, tenui faci- 
3 Propterea visum nobis opus utile, lique paratu 
totis Pro nobis facimus; nec enim te, 
Felicis domibus pictura illudere summe Creator, 
. sancta ; Facta manu capiunt, toto quem cor- 
Si forte attonitas hic per spectacula pore mundus 


mentes Non capit. . 


|THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 347 


The contemporary evidence of Gregory of Nyssa (7 c. 400) shews Gregory of 
that in some places at least the range of subjects had been already Aye 
enlarged. In commemorating Theodorus he has given a description 
of a picture of his martyrdom, which in its intense realism no less 
than in its subject is foreign to the spirit of early Christian Art. 
The artist, he says, had imaged in glowing colours the heroic acts of 
the martyr, his struggles, his pains, the brutal forms of his persecu- 
tors, their insults, the flaming furnace, the blessed consummation of 
the soldier of Christ. 


upon the wall, and do great service’. 


Painting, he adds, even in silence can speak 


About the same time Asterius, bishop of Amasea, gives a strange Asterius. 
description of popular extravagance. Men and women wore robes 
embroidered with all kinds of subjects ‘as if it were not enough to 
have the walls of their houses decorated with pictures’. The more 
pious, he adds, choose scenes from the Gospels, and think that in so 
doing they dress themselves in a way to please God. ‘If they follow 
‘my advice, let them sell such garments and honour the living 
‘images of God. Do not paint Christ, for the one act of humility 
‘of His incarnation, which He voluntarily undertook for us, is suffi- 
‘cient, but bear in thy soul and carry about spiritually (νοητῶς) the 
“incorporeal Word’.’ 

Not long afterwards there is evidence that still more remarkable Nilus. 
freedom was used in ecclesiastical ornament. Olympiodorus con- 


as it is found on sarcophagi: 
Sanctorum labor et merces sibi rite 
coherent, 


In his restoration of the old Basilica 
Paulinus introduced ‘the two Testa- 
ments,’ but his language is very ob- 


secure : Ardua crux pretiumque erucis sub- 
tribus in spatiis duo Testamenta lime corona. 
legamus ; Ipse Deus, nobis princeps crucis at- 


Hane quoque cernentes rationem 
lumine recto, 

Quod nova in antiquis tectis, antiqua 
novis lex 

Pingitur ; est etenim pariter decus 
utile nobis 

In veteri novitas, atque in novitate 
vetustas. 

Compare also xxviii. 22—27. 

In the apse of the Basilica at Funda 

he represented the idea of the Passion 


que corona, 

Inter gloriferi celeste nemus para- 
disi, 

Sub cruce sanguinea niveo stat Chris- 
tus in agno, 

Agnus ut innocua injusto datus 
hostia leto. (Ep. xxxii. 17.) 

1 Greg. Nyss. de S. Theod. Mart. iii. 


Pp. 733 (ed. Migne). 


2 Hom. de div. et Laz. p. 167, 


Migne (Patrol. Gr. xl.). 


348 THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


sulted Nilus (+ 430) on the decorations which he proposed to place 
in a great church to be erected in honour of the martyrs. It was 
his design to represent on both sides of the Sanctuary (ieparetov) 
scenes of hunting and fishing, with representations of various animals 
and fish ; and to erect in ‘the common house’ ‘a thousand crosses, 
and histories (ἱστορίας) of all kinds of birds and beasts and reptiles 
and plants.’ ‘In answer to your letter’, so Nilus writes, ‘I should 
‘say that it would be puerile and childish that the eye of the faith- 
‘ful should wander over such subjects. It befits a strong and manly 
‘character to fashion one single cross at the east of the most sacred 
‘precinct (rod θειοτάτου τεμένους)... «πα to fill the holy sanctuary (τὸν 
“ναὸν τὸν ἅγιον) on both sides with histories of the Old and New 
‘Testament by the hand of a skilful artist, in order that those... 
‘who are unable to read the divine Scriptures may by looking at 
‘the paintings call to mind the courage of men who have served the 


‘true God and be stirred to emulation of their heroic exploits'.’ 


Avcus- In the time of Augustine the African Church had yielded to the 

ἘΠΕῚ: growing fashion. Speaking of the Sacrifice of Isaac he says ‘that 
‘it was sung in many tongues, painted in many places.’ And he 
bears witness that the fashion had brought the results which earlier 
Christians had dreaded: ‘I know many’, he writes, ‘who worship 
tombs and pictures*,’ 

2. Seulp- The remains of early Christian Sculpture are singularly few. 

ture. 


This may be due partly to the costliness of such works, and still 
more to the nature of the Art itself. Sculpture far more than paint- 


1 Nilus, Epp. iv. 61. The letter was 
brought forward at the Second Coun- 
cil of .Nicwa. In the following letter 
Nilus speaks of a young monk who 
recognised « martyr who appeared to 
him from having seen him often repre- 
sented ‘in the paintings’ (ἐκ τοῦ πολ- 
λάκις τὸν χαρακτῆρα τοῦ ἁγίου ἐπὶ τῶν 
εἰκόνων τεθεᾶσθαι). The phrase sounds 
like one of a later time. But Chryso- 
stom bears witness to the custom in his 
Homily on Meletius (ii. 2, p. 516, ed. 
Migne); he says that the portrait of 
that Saint was drawn on ‘rings, seals, 


bowls, and chamber walls.’ 

2c. Faust. xxii. 73. Compare also 
de cons. evv. i. x. 16, Sic omnino errare 
meruerunt qui Christum et apostolos 
ejus non in sanctis codicibus sed in 
pictis parietibus quesierunt; nec 
mirum si a pingentibus fingentes de- 
cepti sunt. 

* de Mor. Eccles. Cath. i. 34 (75) 
novi multos esse sepulcrorum et pic- 
turarumadoratores. The famous phrase 
‘picture (imagines) sunt idiotarum 
libri’ is often referred to Augustine, 
but, as far as I know, wrongly. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 349 


ing was identified with idolatry. The aversion from ‘the graven Statues. 
image’ has perpetuated itself in the Greek Church’, and even to the 
present time Sculpture is for the most part inspired by the spirit of 
the old world. A single ideal figure, the Good Shepherd of the 
Vatican, which seems to have been suggested by the type of the 
Hermes Kriophoros, is referred to the fourth century’; part of a 
single portrait statue, that of Hippolytus, is referred to the fifth 
century. To these two works may be added a small statue of the 
Good Shepherd found at Seville, and perhaps the famous bronze statue 
of St Peter; and the list of the extant Christian statues of the first 


five centuries is complete*, 


The other early works of sculpture 


are sarcophagi, one of which belongs to the third century’. 


1I am informed that statues are 
used as ornaments of Russian churches, 
as (for example) on the outside of the 
Isaac Church at St Petersburgh. I 
may add here that a friend, who has 
given a considerable amount of study 
to the monuments of early Celtic 
hagiology, especially of the Scoto- 
Trish school, informs me that, as far 
as his reading has extended, he ‘ can- 
‘not remember meeting with any 
‘mention of a sacred picture or image, 
‘unless it be in one passage in the 
‘Life of Brigid by Cogitosus, a work 
‘which Colgan attributes to the last 
‘quarter of the sixth century. It is 
‘there stated that in the church of 
‘Kildare, in which the body of Brigid 
‘was still lying buried in the time of 
‘ the author, the paries tabulatus, which 
‘separated the eastern part from the 
‘twin naves, was decoratus et imagi- 
‘nibus depictus, ac linteaminibus tec- 
‘tus (Cogitosus, cap. xxxv., in the 
‘Trias Thaumaturga, p. 523). But 
‘what subjects these imagines depicted, 
‘is not hinted: it is possible that only 
‘flowers, or, at most, figures of angels, 
‘are meant.’ 

2 According to Eusebius (Vit. Const. 
iii. 497) Constantine set up in the 
market at Constantinople ‘ the repre- 
sentation of the Good Shepherd fa- 
miliar to students of Scripture (rd τοῦ 
καλοῦ ποιμένος σύμβολα, τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν 


θείων λογίων ὁρμωμένοις γνώριμα), and a 
gilded bronze figure of Daniel with the 
lions.’ 

3 The two other figures of the Good 
Shepherd which remain (Appell, 1. c. 
Ῥ- 5) are hardly so early. A statuette 
of St Peter (Appell, p. 6) which was 
once at Berlin appears to be of early 
date; but is known only by en- 
gravings. 

_i It is dated 273. See Le Blant, 
Etude sur les Sarcophages Chrétiens de 
la ville d’ Arles, p. iv; and compare id. 
pl. xxxiv. Le Blant assigns to the 
same age the sarcophagus of Livia 
Primitiva, which bears a rude represen- 
tation of the Good Shepherd between 
two sheep, a fish and an anchor: l.c. 
Bottari, T. xxxv. x. 

Garrucci’s fifth volume contains the 
sarcophagi. A very careful and valu- 
able list and description is given by 
Dr Appell, Monuments of Christian Art 
...1872. 

Prof. Ramsay has shewn me a draw- 
ing of a most interesting relief which 
is probably the oldest remaining 
specimen of Christian sculpture. It is 
found on a monument erected by 
‘Abercius a deacon, to himself, his 
wife, and his children,’ and represents a 
small figure with one arm laid across 
the breast standing between two profiles 
of a man and a woman executed on a 
larger scale. These profiles are evi- 


350 THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


The cha- 
racter of 
the sepul- 
chral 
subjects. 


In spite of the limited scope which sarcophagi offered to the 
artist the sculptures which they present are of great interest as 
confirming the general impressions conveyed by the remains of early 
Christian painting. The sarcophagi of Helena and Constantia, the 
mother and daughter of Constantine, are perfectly classical in charac- 
ter. The vine and winemaking which are represented on the latter 
recall the earliest wall-paintings. Such objects lend themselves 
veadily to a Christian interpretation while they are not distinctively 
Christian. 


Christian meaning can only be given with ditiiculty. But for 


In other eases classical imagery is found to which a 


the most part the same scenes are found as in the Catacombs, 
and they are treated in the same manner. The sculptor brought 
to his work the experience and the traditions of ancient art, as far as 
they still survived, and used them for the expression of new ideas*. 


3. Archi- 


Meanwhile Christian Architecture had made vigorous progress. 
tecture. 


When the persecution of Diocletian broke out at Nicomedia (a. Ὁ. 
303), ‘a most lofty temple’ there was one of the first objects of de- 
struction. At that time it is evident that the religious buildings of 

Christians were of considerable importance ; and the church which 
Paulinus. Paulinus erected at Tyre not many years afterwards (A.D. 31 3) pro- 


bably only reproduced the type of earlier works of which no detailed 


dently portraits, and that of the woman 
has considerable artistic merit. Prof. 
Ramsay places the work c. 200. [He 
now, for reasons which do not appear 


sal custom, while Parker’s engraving 
‘taken from a photograph’ (pl. xiii.) 
represents him as fully clothed. Dr 
Appell says that the figure is modern. 


to me 1o be conclusive, inclines to a 
much later date.] 

1 E.g. The figures of the Dioscuri 
on a sarcophagus at Arles. Le Blant, 
pl. xxiii. pp. 38 ff. On the use of clas- 
sical details see Le Blant, l. c. Intro- 
duction, pp. X. f.; 19. 

2 Some examples shew considerable 
artistic merit. For example a sarco- 
phagus in the Lateran Museum given 
in Northcote and Brownlow, ii. 255; 
Parker, pl. xvii.; Bottari, T. xxxiii. 
The sarcophagus of Junius Bassus 
(A.D. 359) shews thoughtful work. It is 
hard to understand how other en- 
gravings come to represent Daniel as 
nude, according to all but univer- 


(Afonuments of Christian Art, Ὁ. 10.) 

A decree of Theodosius (a.p. 382) 
recognises the claim of statues of the 
Gods to be preserved for their interest 
as works of art in spite of their past 
misuse for purposes of idolatry: Adem 
{in the province of Osdroene] olim 
frequentie [Ὁ Defim] dedicatam,...in 
qua simulacra feruntur posita, artis 
pretio quam divinitate metienda, iu- 
giter patere publici consilii auctoritate 
decernimus. At the same time the 
caution is added: ne illic prohibitorum 
usus sacrificiorum huius occasione 
aditus permissus esse credatur (Cod. 
Theodos. xvi. 10, 8). 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 351 


description has been preserved. Eusebius has fortunately given 
an account of this which proves beyond question that Christians were 
ready to devote the costliest work to purposes of divine worship’. 
The central door was decorated " with plates of bronze and reliefs’ 
(παραπήγμασί τε χαλκοῦ σιδηροδέτοις καὶ ποικίλμασιν ἀναγλύφοις).᾽ 
Elaborate carvings of wood were freely used. The roof was made of 
cedar. And Eusebius taxes the powers of his rhetoric to represent 
the splendour of the effect produced both by the costliness of the 
materials and by the beauty of the workmanship. The external 
magnificence was indeed designed, if we may believe him, to attract 
passers by and lead them to enter the sacred precincts’. 

The church of Paulinus was a genuine expression of Christian Constan- 
feeling. Less stress can be laid on the evidence furnished by the on 
works of Constantine at Jerusalem. These so impressed Eusebius 
that he suggests that they may have been prefigured by the prophets 
in their description of the New Jerusalem*. No kind of rich deco- 
ration was spared. The interior walls were encrusted with variegated 
marbles. The carved ceiling was gilded throughout. The sewmi- 
circular apse was adorned with twelve columns, supporting as many 
silver vases which the Emperor ‘ presented as an offering to his God.’ 
And Eusebius says that he could not enumerate the other gifts ‘ of 
gold and silver and precious stones’ with which the building was 
enriched*. 

The works of Constantine at Rome seem to have been of a 
similar type; and the drawings of the original Basilica of St Peter 
which have been preserved are so full of beauty that it is difficult 
not to feel that the present building has been dearly purchased by 
the loss of the greatest of his churches. 

The development of Christian Architecture gave occasion to the Mosaics. 
first original effort of Christian Art, the application of Mosaic on a 


1 H.E.X. 4. αὐτῆς τῆς ὄψεως ἐπὶ τὴν εἴσοδον προτρά- 


5. Euseb. l. c. ὡς ἂν μὴ παρατρέχῃ τις 
ὅτι μὴ τὴν ψυχὴν κατανυγεὶς πρότερον 
μνήμῃ τῆς τε πρὶν ἐρημίας καὶ τῆς νῦν 
παραδόξου θαυματουργίας, ὑφ᾽ ἧς τάχα 
καὶ ἑλκυσθήσεσθαι κατανυγέντα καὶ πρὸς 


πήσεσθαι ἤλπισεν. 

3 Vit. Const. ii. 33. 

4 Td. 34—40. Bingham (Antiqut- 
ties, viii. § 5) has given an interesting 
early inventory of Church vessels. 


352 THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


large scale to wall-pictures. The earliest remaining examples are in 
the churches of St Constantia and St Maria Maggiore at Rome; and 
one of the most beautiful in the tomb of Galla Placidia at Ravenna’. 
This form of art, it is obvious, lends itself naturally to con- 
ventional representation; and it is not unlikely that the later 
Mosaics preserve unchanged the earliest types as they were suc- 
cessively fixed. 

One example deserves to be specially noticed, that on the apse of 
the church of St Pudentiana at Rome. 
better idea of the peculiar spirit and power of early Christian Art. 


No existing work gives a 
The treatment is conventional without being lifeless. A spiritual 
purpose is dominant without destroying the natural dignity of the 


figures and the grouping. The spectator is forced by the beauty of 


Domestic 
Art. 


that which he sees to look beyond to that which is suggested?. 


There are very few traces of the domestic Art of the early Chris- 


tians. 


Clement of Alexandria gives a list of subjects which might 


properly be engraved on rings; and existing specimens present nearly 


all the types which he allows*. 


1 There is a drawing of this Mosaic 
in Ὁ. C. A. ii. 6, 1328, and a large 
coloured drawing at South Kensington. 
It is excellently described in Wolt- 
mann and Woermann, Hist. of Paint- 
ing, London, 1880, i. 167 f. 

2 There are valuable representations 
of early Mosaics in the South Kensing- 
ton Museum. See Christian Mosaic 
Pictures by J. W. Appell, Ph.D., 1877. 

Garrucci devotes his fourth volume 
to Mosaics, 

3 For the history and remains of 
early Christian glyptic, Art see Ὁ. W. 
King, Antique Gems and Rings, ii. § vii. 
pp. 24 ff. London, 1872; and Dr Ba- 
bington’s article Gems in D.C. A. 

A simple enumeration of the subjects 
of the small collection of early Chris- 
tian gems in the British Museum will 
give a fair idea of the general character 
of these works. 

1, A dove, olive branch and star 
(ruby). 

x. A fish, olive, pastoral staff. 


Many early Christian lamps are 


3. A fish and anchor, with the word 
ETTITYNXANOY (D. C. A. p. 714). 

4. A cross, fish and dove (D. C. A. 
Pp. 713). 

5. Two fish (ascending and descend- 
ing) and a bowl. 

6. An anchor between two dolphins 
with the letters a. P. 1. 

7. An anchor between two fish. 

8. 1x@yc enclosed between two olive 
branches (sard). 

g. An anchor-cross with two doves 
resting on the arms, two fish (ascend- 
ing and descending), and two palms. 

10. Good Shepherd under an olive 
with two doves (hematite). 

11. Good Shepherd between two 
sheep: very rude. 

12. Good Shepherd with iH yc: 
very rude. 

13. Good Shepherd, with sheep and 
two lambs, under a tree with a dove: 
very rude. 

14. Good Shepherd and Jonah cast 
out by the monster: a dove with olive 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 353 


works of considerable merit’. And one of the gold coins of Constan- 
tine offers a unique and most beautiful embodiment of a Christian 
thought. The Emperor is represented as ‘looking upwards in the 
attitude of prayer’: so, Eusebius says, he wished to express his 
faith’. 

The rapid sketch which has been given of the progress of Chris- Character- 
tian Art in different directions will be sufficient to indicate the ae 
circumstances under which it gained finally a recognised place in ὅδ 
Christian life, and especially in Christian worship. It was, as we 
have seen, fashioned on classical models; it inherited the use of classi- 
cal methods ; it incorporated some of the familiar subjects of classical 


use’; but at the same time it embodied, even if only in an elementary 


branch: a palm and gourd with a star 


between: in the centre the mono- 
gram. 
15. Two parts: above, the Good 


Shepherd and Jonah under the gourd: 
below, an anchor, dove, branches, fish, 
figures kneeling, a figure floating 
above. 

16. A Cross, which has become a 
living tree, with a dove resting upon 
it. (This is a singularly interesting 
device. ) 

17. Two sheep between two palms: 
very well executed. 


18. Chariot with two horses and 
angel. 

19. Four sheep with collars. 

20. The temptation. 

21. Cross with the Chrisma (sap- 
phire). 

22. Palm between two branches. 


23. Palm tree, two branches and 
two birds with inscription: very rude. 

1 See Dr Babington’s article in 
D.C. A. 

2 Vit. Const. iv. 15. An engraving 
of the coin, which does not do it jus- 
tice, is given in Ὁ. C. A. Money, 
Fig. 23. Dr Babington (Ὁ. C. A. i. p. 
720) refers to an agate in which the 
Emperor is represented in the same 
way. 

Some other coins of Christian em- 
perors deserve mention as illustrating 


W. J. 


the symbolism of Christian Art. Most 
conspicuous among these is the small 
‘third brass’ coin of Constantine, 
bearing on the reverse the words spes 
publica with the labarum, the spiked 
end of which pierces the serpent 
(Ὁ. C. A. s.v. Labarum and Money, 
fig. 16). A variation of this design 
Constantine is said to have set over 
the portal of his palace (Euseb. Vit. 
Const. iii. 3). The old device of the 
phoenix with the legend Felix tem- 
porum reparatio occurs on coins of 
Constans and Constantius. On coins 
of the two Eudoxias Victory is repre- 
sented inscribing the letters of the 
sacred monogram on a shield. Ona 
coin of Valentinian III., which has 
the common legend Victoria Augusti, 
Satan takes the place of the barbarian 
whom the Emperor treads under his 
feet. At last the head of the Lord, of 
a singularly dignified type, appears on 
a gold coin of Justinian II. Compare 
GC. W. King, Early Christian Numis- 
matics, pp. 35 fi. 

A very complete account of the in- 
teresting Christian glass work is given 
by Dr Babington in D. C. A. (Glass). 
See also Garrucci, Tom. iii. 

{I should have been glad to add some 
account of early Christian Ivories, but 
that is now impossible. 18gt-] 

3 See p. 343, D. I. 


23 


Early 
Christian 
Art con- 
ventional 


in subject; 
and in 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


form, the power of a new life. It was conventional and it was sym- 
bolic. By these characteristics it claimed effectually the office of in- 
terpreting the invisible through the visible, of giving predominance to 
the spiritual idea over the external appearance, of advancing from 
within outwards, from the thought to the expression. The means 
adopted for securing these ends belong, no doubt, to the infancy of 
Christian Art. Efforts which were arrived at directly and simply in 
the first stage of the new artistic life can be secured now without 
any sacrifice of the freedom or of the fulness of the artist’s labours. 
But this fact does not deprive the earliest works of their distinctive 
meaning and importance. 

Early Christian Art is conventional. This is true both as to the 
choice and as to the treatment of subjects. It is indeed necessary to 
remember that our illustrations are chiefly drawn from the Cata- 
combs, from tombs and sarcophagi. But when allowance is made 
for the limitation of the artist’s freedom by the nature of his work, 
it seems certain that other influences must have kept him within 
the narrow circle of subjects to which he confined himself. He made 
a new departure in Art, though perhaps unconsciously, and strove 
to call attention to the divine element in life. For this purpose 
it was necessary to take a few familiar subjects which could easily 
be made to express a universal spiritual truth. Scenes and figures 
came in this way to express great thoughts; and when this corre- 
spondence between facts and ideas was established in a few cases, 
a lesson of wide application was surely taught. 

Thus it is that a few subjects from the Old Testament and a few 
from the New Testament are repeated both in painting and sculpture 
with almost wearisome monotony. Among these three scenes from 
the history of Jonah ((a) Jonah cast out of the ship ; (6) disgorged by 
the sea-monster ; (c) resting under the gourd), Daniel between two 
lions, Noah in the ark, the feeding of the multitudes and the 
Raising of Lazarus are perhaps the most frequent in early works; 
and next to these the Fall, Moses striking the rock, the three 
Children in the furnace, Job in his distress, the sacrifice of Abra- 


ham, the ascension of Elijah, the adoration of the Magi, the miracle 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 355 


of Cana’.. It is very remarkable that only one representation of 
David is referred to by the historians of early Christian Art’. 

The treatment of these subjects offers little variation. Jonah is treatment. 
always represented nude, and the sea-monster seems to have been 
modelled on the type of that found in representations of Andromeda. 

Daniel, nearly always nude, stands in the attitude of prayer between 
two lions placed symmetrically. Lazarus is drawn like a mummy, 
and his tomb commonly appears like a small chapel, while the Lord 
holds a rod in hand. The Magi are dressed in Persian (Phrygian) 
costume. The treatment of the Good Shepherd offers a partial excep- 
tion to the general uniformity. In addition to the commonest type 
in which He bears the lamb over His shoulders, the Shepherd is 
represented with the pipe, and leaning on His staff, and with goats?; 
It is 
not difficult to see the special colouring which is given in each case 


and on a sarcophagus He appears in three separate forms‘. 
to the common thought. Elsewhere there is little change; and 
anyone who examines the work of Garrucci will feel the truth of 
the words used at the second Council of Nica, ‘the making of 
‘pictures is not the invention of artists but the admitted legislation 
‘and tradition of the Catholic Church*.’ 

This view as it was maintained by the artists of the- Greek Chris- 


tian Art 


Church was necessarily fatal to Art. The conventionalism of early symbolic. 


work was no more than a first step in the new life. Conventionalism 
was the condition of Symbolism, that is of the simplest assertion of 
the spiritual purpose of Art. But when the end was gained, the 
provisional restriction of subjects ceased to be necessary. 

1 Lists of examples of these dif- 


ferent subjects are given in various 
writers. It is sufficient to refer to 


xxiv.) and the other at Arles (Le 
Blant, ix.). 
? See p. 358, n. 2. 


Canon Venables’ articles Fresco, and 
Old Testament in Ὁ. C. A., and Mr 
Tyrwhitt’s article in the same work on 
the different subjects. See also C. J. 
Hemans, The Church in the Cata- 
combs, Cont. Rev. Oct. 1866. 

How great was the tendency of the 
subjects to become fixed is shewn by 
the identity of the decorations of two 
sarcophagi, one at Rome (Bottari, 


3 Compare Northcote and Brownlow, 
ii. p. 24. Bottari, Ixxviii., Ixxx., 
xevil., Ο111., cv., cxiil., cxvi., cxvili., 
exliii., exlv., clv., clxxii., clxxix. 

4 Bottari, clxiii. 

3 Οὐ ξωγραάφων ἐφεύρετις ἡ τῶν εἰκόνων 
ποίησις ἀλλὰ τῆς καθολικῆς ἐκκλησίας 
ἔγκριτος θεσμοθεσία καὶ παράδοσις. Conc. 
Nie. it. Act. vi. (Coneil. vili. 1085 ed. 
Colet.) 


23—2 


356 


The sym- 
bolism of 
figures 


recognised 


in the 
works. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


We are thus brought to the second characteristic of early Chris- 
tian Art: it was symbolic. There is no doubt some exaggeration in 
the theory, which has gained the support of De’ Rossi, that Christian 
artists worked under the direction of theologians and embodied defi- 
nite schemes of doctrine in their pictures. But it is impossible to 
study the cycle of subjects in connexion with early Christian litera- 
ture and not feel that the artists embodied thoughts which their 
religious services brought before them. Scenes in the Old Testa- 
ment shadowed forth truths of the Gospel and illustrated the reality 
of the one purpose underlying all life. By repeating these it was not 
difficult to suggest the thought of the correspondence between differ- 
ent stages in the fulfilment of the divine will, of the inner meaning 
of ordinary events, of the way in which things are set ‘one over 
against another.’ The offering of Isaac indicated as much as the 
early believer thought could be safely indicated, in a direct represen- 
tation, of the Lord’s Passion. The deliverance of Noah from and by 
the waters was an eloquent symbol of salvation in the Church 
‘through water.’ The four rivers of Paradise suggested thoughts of 
the streams of grace flowing to the Church through the Gospel and 
the Gospels. The domestic feast, and the feeding of the multitudes 
called up recollections of the provision which the Lord had made and 
still continues to make for the material and spiritual sustenance of 
His people. Above all the familiar figure of the Good Shepherd 
brought together the imagery of the Old Testament and the experi- 
ence of daily life, and in some degree perhaps symbolic forms of 
ancient art’. In one subject at least the imagination of the old 
world was allowed its full right. The myth of Orpheus expressed 
with far-reaching pathos the faith of man in a restored order of 
creation ; and the Christian artist gladly accepted the pictured parable 
of which his faith gave the meaning. 

The reality of this symbolic meaning is placed beyond all ques- 
tion by the direct testimony of the monuments themselves. In 
several cases St Peter, ‘the leader of the New Israel,’ is represented 


1 On the relation of the Good Shep- Northcote and Brownlow, ii. pp. 26 ff. 
herd to the Hermes Kriophoros see 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 357 


under the figure of Moses striking the rock. Not only is the figure of 
Moses commonly given in the conventional type of St Peter, but the 
identification is completed by the addition of the name, Peter' 
In other examples Christ Himself appears as Moses? and again as 
Abraham ὅ. 


attitude of prayer occupies the place of Noah in the ark, the lessons 


Elsewhere, as when a young Christian man in the 


taught by the experience of the old saints are brought down into 
actual life*. 

An illustration of a different kind is furnished by the sarcophagus 
On this, in the small reliefs which fill the spandrils of 


the arcade, a sheep occupies the place of the divine representation in 


of Bassus. 
the familiar cycle of subjects. A sheep receives the Law, strikes 
the rock, administers Baptism, multiplies the loaves, raises Lazarus. 
So the unity of the working of God throughout the Old and New 
Testaments is vividly brought out’. 


When the general principle is once recognised it is scarcely Symbo- 
lism of 


possible to overlook the combination of thoughts which is indicated groups. 


by definite groupings of types, such as Moses striking the rock and 
the raising of Lazarus®; Moses striking the rock and Baptism’; Christ 
teaching in the centre, and grouped round the sacrifice of Abraham, 
the feeding of the multitudes, Moses striking the rock, Noah, the 


1 Compare Northcote and Brownlow, 
ii. frontispiece, and p. 180; Le Blant, 
Sarc. Chrét. p. xxii.; pp. 36 f. 

3 Garrucci, lv. 2; xiii. 1. 

3 Garrucci, T. xliii. τ. 

4 It is enough simply to refer to the 
unquestioned symbolism of ‘ the Fish’ 
(IXOYC). Except in scenes of ‘ fish- 
ing’ this figure hardly comes within 
the proper scope of Art, though it il- 
lustrates the attitude of the artist. 
Compare Ὁ. C. A.s.v. The most re- 
markable use of ‘the Fish’ which I 
have seen is in a picture from Cyren- 
aica where several distinct kinds of 
fish are combined with a figure of the 
Good Shepherd (Garrucci, tav. 105 ¢). 
Fishing and Baptism are combined : 
Garrucci, vii. z. Figures of some very 
curious gems with the ‘Fish’ are 
given in D.C. Α. 1. p. 713. Le Blant 


(Sare. Chrét. Intr. § 5) has pointed out 
the remarkable correspondence be- 
tween the subjects on sarcophagi 
and the historical references in the 
Offices for the dead. His last words 
are well worth quoting: Mais, je le 
répéte, ce qui me semble dominer dans 
le cycle des représentations figurées sur 
les tombes, c’est l’idée méme dont s’in- 
spirent les liturgies funéraires et qui 
fit mettre aux lévres du preux Roland 
ce cri supréme: O notre vrai Pére, toi 
qui ressuscitas saint Lazare d’entre les 
morts et qui défendis Daniel contre 
les lions, sauve mon 4me et protége- 
la contre tous périls (p. xxxix). 

5 Compare Northcote and Brownlow, 
li. p. 260. 

6 Bottari, T. cxxix. 

7 Le Blant, xv. 


358 THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


three children'; and again, Orpheus in the centre, and around David 
with the sling’, Moses striking the rock, Daniel, the raising of 
Lazarus, separated by four pastoral scenes*; yet again, the Good 
Shepherd in the centre, and around the raising of Lazarus, Moses 
striking the rock, the healing of the Blind, Job* 
Daniel, the Good Shepherd, and Jonah cast to the whale occur in a 


In one example 


continuous picture®. 


The re- The symbolism of Christian Art is one expression of another 
᾿ of - . - - - - - . - Ω Ω 
one Art. mark by which it is distinguished, its reserve. This characteristic is 


specially illustrated by the treatment of subjects from the Gospels, 
and especially of the Person of the Lord. As early as the second 
century Gnostic sects had alleged portraits of the Lord®. Such 
representations were foreign to the mind of the Church. They do 
not occur in works connected with the Catholic Communion till the 
fourth century at the earliest, and then in conventional types’. At 
the same time the figures of the Lord which appear commonly on 
sarcophagi shew Him as a youthful figure of a pure classical form 


with no attempt at realistic portraiture’. It is no doubt due to the 


1 Bottari, T. lix.; Garr. xxiv. 

° Bottari says that this is the single 
representation of David with which he 
is acquainted in early art (p. 32). May 
not the figure really be that of the 
Sower? 

3 Bottari, lxiii.; Garr. xxv. 

4 Bottari, xci., Garr. xl. Other ex- 
amples are given Garrucci xliii.; xlviii.; 
li. (Bottari, cxviii.). 

5 Bottari, T. clxx. 

® Tren. i. 24, 25. 
Gems, i. Ὁ. 721. 

7 Compare Northcote and Brownlow, 
ii. 216 ff.; Pearson On the Creed, p. 88 
note; and the articles by Mr Tyrwhitt 
and Archd. Cheetham in D. ©, A. i. 
pp. 874 ff. 

The famous statue at Cesarea (Bu- 
seb. vii. 18) cannot in any case be 
regarded as contravening the general 
statement. 

I do not enter on the question of the 
date of the legendary portraits of the 
Lord. The two specimens on ‘cloth’ 


Compare Ὁ. Ὁ. A. 


reproduced by Mr Heaphy in his work 
on The Likeness of Christ (edited by W. 
Bayliss, London, 1880), from the origi- 
nals at St Peter’s at Rome, and St 
Bartholomew’s at Genoa, are most re- 
markable works. I know nothing in 
early Christian Art at all resembling 
the former in style. Those who have 
seen ‘the Holy Face’ at Lucca speak 
of it as being no less impressive. 

8 A very fine example is found on the 
sarcophagus of Junius Bassus. Appell, 
p- 9; Bottari, xv.; Parker, xvii. See 
also Bottari, xxxiii, Another remark- 
able example is given in Bottari liy. 


“With these may be compared the cor- 


responding figures of the bearded 
Christ: Le Blant, pl. iv.; Bottari, xxi., 
xxii., xxili., xxv., xxviii. The distinc- 
tion which has been drawn between the 
beardless and bearded figures as ex- 
pressing the human and divine aspects 
of Christ’s Person (see Le Blant, p. 25) 
does not seem to hold good. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 359 


reverent shrinking from all representations of the Lord in His 
human Presence that scenes from the Gospel history were with very 
few exceptions carefully avoided. 

A rude sketch of the Nativity is found’ upon a fragment of a 
sarcophagus dated a.D. 343. There are representations of the visit 
of the Magi of as early a date*. Other scenes, except the Raising of 
Lazarus, are very rare and of isolated occurrence. 

In this connexion the early treatment of the Passion is of the The treat- 


» 2 ἑ ment of 
One of the earliest representations of the subject the Ἐππ 


sion. 


deepest interest. 
is of singular beauty and impressiveness. It is found on a sarco- 
phagus preserved in the Lateran and referred to the fourth century’. 
The face of the sarcophagus is divided by columns into five compart- 
ments. The two end compartments shew on one side Christ, a 
youthful figure, led by a soldier, and Pilate washing his hands; on 
the other Christ crowned by a soldier with a crown not of thorns but 
In the 


centre is the Cross terminated by the sacred monogram encircled by 


of flowers, and Simon the Cyrenian bearing His Cross*. 


a wreath. On the arms of the Cross two doves are resting, and 
beneath are two figures of the Roman guards, one watching and one 
sleeping. So the whole story of sadness and joy, of suffering and 
glory, of death and triumph, is eloquently told. 

This representation of the Passion was widely spread, though 
without the accompanying scenes*. 

In one example below the Cross, in the place commonly occupied 
by the two guards, the Lord is represented appearing to two women’. 
In another the crowned Cross is the object of devout contemplation 


smaller size and dress of the figure 
bearing the Cross leave no doubt as to 


1 Northcote and Brownlow, ii. 235. 
2 The occurrence of the Star in the 


group noticed above, p..343, 0. 3, seems 
to shew that that really represents the 
visit of the Magi. 

3 Appell, p. 21; Parker, xv. ; North- 
cote and Brownlow, ii. 253. Compare 
Paulinus Ep. xxxii. 17, quoted above, 
p. 346 n. 

4 This is well pointed out by Le 
Blant, Sarc. Chrét. p. 18. His en- 
graving p. xxxiii. 3 is admirable. The 


the artist’s meaning. 

Le Blant observes that this is the 
single example in which any incident 
of the Passion subsequent to the ap- 
pearance before Pilate is represented 
in early art (J. c.). 

5 Examples are given by Garrucci, 


Tavv. 349-353; 403- ᾿ 
6 Bottari, 1', xxx.; Garrucci, T. 600]. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


to the apostles, who stand six on each side with their right hands 
upraised, while from above out of the starry heaven a hand places a 
crown upon the head of each’. 

Another treatment of the idea of the Passion, which occurs on 
the sarcophagus of Anicius Probus, who died in 395, is scarcely less 
beautiful. 


into five compartments. 


In this case also the face of the sarcophagus is divided 
The two on either side are occupied each 
by two disciples. In the centre one, which is wider, the Lord appears 
between St Peter and St Paul. 
figure, upon a mound from which flow the four streams of the new 
Paradise: in His left hand He holds the roll of the Gospel, and in 


the right a jewelled cross’. 


He stands, a graceful youthful 


The full meaning of this representation is brought out more 
clearly in other examples, where the Lord stands on the mound, and 
by Him a Lamb bearing the Cross upon its head*. The same thought 
is indicated by a Lamb standing in front of the Cross; or by a Lamb 
with a cruciform nimbus which stands upon a mound from which 
issue the four rivers*; and less distinctly by a Cross or the Chrisma 
between two lambs®. 

Yet more significant and touching is a representation of the 
Passion which is found on a slab preserved in Wirksworth Church, 
Derbyshire. The slab was found some years ago buried under the 
floor of the Chancel. The work is rude, and was probably executed 
by some English sculptor of the 1xth or xth century, but the design 
is of a much earlier date, and may reasonably be referred to an 
Italian artist of the vith or vith century. 


The larger portion of the slab which remains is in good preserva- 


1 Le Blant, pl. xiv. A small en- ρ]. xxvii 


graving of this work is given in D. C. 
A. i. p. 108. 

3 Bottari, T. xvi. A similar group 
with the addition of two palm trees is 
found in another surcophagus: Bot- 
tari, T. xxxv. 

3 Bottari, Tavv. xxi., xxii, 1. With 
this may be compared the rude, almost 
startling, figure of Christ throned with 
the Chrisma upon His head: Le Blant, 


+ Garrucci, T. ccelvi.; T. 355. 

5 Garrucci, Tavv. 10, 303, 337) 345 
389, 393) 422, 426. 

On the cover of an Evangelarium at 
Milan are several typical scenes from 
the Lord’s Life; but there is no Cruci- 
fixion. In place of this there is a 
Lamb in the centre with a wreath: 
Labarte, Hist. des Arts industriels... 
18645 pl. vi.; Garrucci, T. 454. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 361 


tion, and contains scenes from the Life of the Lord, among others 
less distinct, the Nativity and the Ascension in a most suggestive 
juxtaposition, the Feet-washing and the Burial, and between these a 
symbolic image of the Passion. On the centre of a plain Greek 
Cross is laid the figure of a dead lamb. As far as I can learn the 
conception is unique’. The drooping head and the bent legs of the 

victim tell of death with eloquent force; and under this limited 

aspect it is perhaps allowable to present for contemplation the Dead 

Christ’. No one, I think, can regard it without feeling that we 

have lost greatly by substituting a literal representation for such a 

symbol ὅ. 

The same spirit of reserve which led Christian artists to shrink Repre- 
from direct representations of the Lord’s sufferings, kept them also pees 
from representing the sufferings of His martyrs. A single painting OM 4 
in the Cemetery of St Callixtus is supposed to portray the trial of 
Christian confessors*. And a single gem, a new-year’s gift, of 
unusually good execution, which is referred to the age of Constantine, 
It 


seemed enough for the most part to represent the death and deliver- 


represents an actual martyrdom, perhaps that of St Agnes’®. 


ance of martyrs by the type of the three Children. 
In correspondence with the reserve of early Christian Art we Joyfulness 


of Chris- 
The reserve was a natural conse- tian Art. 


may also notice its joyousness. 
quence of the vivid realisation of spiritual truth: the aim of the 
artist was, so to speak, to let earth speak of heaven and not to 


confine heaven in forms of earth. The joyousness was another 


1 The image of the Living Lamb is 
found on the centre of the Vatican 
Cross (D. C. A. 1, 513) and elsewhere. 
A very striking example occurs in a 
bas-relief on the Ciborium at St Mark’s 
Venice: Grim. de St Laurent, Icono- 
graphie de la Croix... in Didron’s An- 
nales Archéologiques xxvi. p. 213 (Paris, 
1869). It is said that the Face of the 
Lord is represented as the intersection 
of the arms of the Cross in the Trans- 
figuration at Ravenna: D.C. A. p. 494. 

2 1 feel unable to believe that a gem 
representing the Dead Christ (D.C. A. 
i. p. 718) can be as early as the ivth 


century. 

3 This is not the place to enter on 
the history of the direct representa- 
tions of the Crucifixion first ideal and 
then realistic. The subject is of deep 
theological importance, but it belongs 
wholly toa later period than that with 
which we are concerned here. The essay 
of M. Grimouard de St Laurent re- 
ferred to in note 1, is a valuable contri- 
bution to the history, but by no means 
exhaustive. 

4 Northcote and Brownlow, i. pl. 8, 
11. 173. 

5 D.C. A. i. p. 719. 


362 THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


manifestation of the same faith. In spite of appearances the Chris- 
tian believed that the victory over sin and death was already won; 
and he gave expression to his conviction. The characteristic words 
‘in pace’ which marked the ‘rest’ of the believer were reflected in 
all the associations of death. The painful literalism which deforms 
many of the monuments of the xvth and xvith centuries found no 
place in the vth and vith, and still less in earlier times. The terrible 
pictures which Tertullian drew of the sufferings of persecutors, and 
the scarcely less terrible descriptions by Augustine of the sufferings 
of the wicked were not as yet embodied by Art. No attempt was 
made to give distinctness to the unseen world. It is doubtful 
whether there are any representations of angels earlier than the 
latter half of the fourth century, and it seems certain that there are 
no representations of powers of evil, other than the natural serpent, 
till a later date. 
By that time the work of early Christian Art was ended. 


III. 


ts ie From what has been said it will appear that the relation of Chris- 
Christian. tianity to Art is that which it holds generally to life. It answers to 
ity to Art. 3 fresh birth, a transfiguration of all human powers, by the revela- 
tion of their divine connexions and destiny. The pregnant words of 
St Paul, ‘old things (ra ἀρχαῖα) passed away: behold, they have 
become new,’ have an application here. There is no loss, no aban- 
donment of the past triumphs of thought and insight and labour, but 
they are quickened by a new power, and disclosed in a new position 
with regard to the whole discipline of man. Christian Art is the 
interpretation of beauty in life under the light of the Incarnation. 
The ministry of the beautiful in every shape, in sound, in form, in 
colour, is claimed for God through man. 

ahs cone The realisation of this idea must necessarily be slow, but it is 
realised, impossible that the facts of the Incarnation and Resurrection can 


leave Art in the same position as before. The interpretation of 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 303 


Nature and the embodiment of thought and feeling through outward 
things must assume a new character when it is known not only that 
Creation is the expression of the will of God, and in its essence 
‘very good,’ but also that in humanity it has been taken into per- 
sonal fellowship with the Word, through whom it was called into 
being. Such a revelation enables the student to see in the phe- 
nomena of the visible order Sacraments, so to speak, of the spiritual 
and unseen, and free him from bondage to ‘the world’ while he 
devotes himself with devout enthusiasm to the representation of the 
The Old Testament teaches 


us to regard Creation as an embodiment of a divine thought, marred 


mysterious beauty which it contains. 


by the self-assertion and fall of its temporal sovereign: the New 
Testament teaches us to see it brought again potentially to harmony 
with God through the Blood of Him who is its Eternal Author and 
Head (Col. i. 1423). 

The Gospel therefore seeks the service of Art in the sensible but neces- 
proclamation of its message. The spirit must clothe itself in some ae 
way, and the dress may help to emphasise salient features in that 
which it partly veils. No doubt it is true that the spirit can in any 
case illuminate that in which it is confined; but it is no less true 
that it has a necessary tendency to fashion its own shrine, even as 
the soul ‘doth the body make’.’ 

The early controversy as to the outward appearance of the Lord Illustra- 
illustrates this twofold truth’, Some argued from the description of ara 
‘the servant of the Lord’ that the Son of man had ‘no form or eed Β a 
comeliness,’ ‘no beauty that we should desire Him.’ And others ῊΣ ioe 
replied that it could not but be that perfect holiness should become ance. 


visible in perfect beauty. To the spiritual eye, we feel, there would 


1 A remarkable and somewhat ob- 
scure passage of Athenagoras points 
to one aspect of this truth in the dis- 
cussion of the objects of worship in 
pre-Christian times. After quoting 
the famous lines from the Melanippe 
of Euripides (ὁρᾷς τὸν ὑψοῦ τόνδ᾽ ἄπειρον 
αἰθέρα...) he says τῶν μὲν γὰρ οὔτε τὰς 
οὐσίας, αἷς ἐπικατηγορεῖσθαι τὸ ὄνομα 
συμβέβηκεν, ὑποκειμένας ἑώρα...τὸν δὲ 


ἀπὸ τῶν ἔργων (sc. ἑώρα), ὄψει τῶν 
ἀδήλων νοῶν τὰ φαινόμενα ἀέρος, αἰθέρος, 
γῆς (Legat. pro Christ. 6. 5). To the 
true spiritual eye natural phenomena 
reveal something of the divine charac- 
ter more really than any creation of 
the imagination of man. 

2 On the appearance of the Lord 
compare the Oxford translation of 
Tertullian, note F, pp. 252 ff. 


364 


Art reveals 
the divine 
end. 


Christian- 
ity does 
not alter 
the range 
of Art. 


Opposing 
influences. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


be no final antagonism in the two statements. And Art by spiritual 
sympathy is able to guide the spectator to a right vision of that 
which is not naturally discerned. 

Or, to present the same thought from the opposite side, as all 
Art brings the ideal, in some sense, before us in a material form, 
and preserves for earth a definite place in the present order, so 
Christian Art is characterised by the endeavour to present ‘in many 
parts and in many fashions’ that view of Creation wherein it is 
shewn in ‘earnest expectation’ ‘waiting for the revelation of the 
sons of God’ (Rom. viii. 19). In other words Christian Art treats 
its subject as that which has partly lost and is partly striving 
towards a divine type, not self-complete and not an end, and seeks 
to make clear the signs of the true character and the true goal of all 
with which it deals. It is directed not to humanity and nature in 
themselves, but to humanity and nature as revelations of the Divine. 

Such an effort is obviously of universal application. Christian 
Art, like Christianity itself, embraces all life. The inspiration of the 
new birth extends to every human interest and faculty. Christian 
Art, as Christian,.does not differ from classical Art in range of 
subject but in its prevailing treatment. It will indeed happen again 
and again that ‘the soul naturally Christian’ unconsciously fulfils 
its high office of spiritual interpretation in classical works, but 
Christian Art exists by and for this. And there is nothing to which 
the office does not apply, nothing in which it does not find scope for 
exercise. The joys and sorrows and energies of men, the manifold 
forms and varying moods of nature, all have their ‘religious’ aspect, 
if religion be, as it assuredly is, the striving towards the unity of 
man, the world, and God. Music, which is, as it were, the voice of 
the society, and architecture which is as its vestment, have in all 
their applications a religious power. This Christianity affirms as its 
postulate, and by affirming determines its relation to Art. 

The fulfilment of this universal claim, as has been already said, 
will be necessarily slow. The conquest of life for Christ is gradual 
and not without reverses. New forces are not subdued without a 


struggle, and old forces, which have been subdued, not unfrequently 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 365 


rise up again in dangerous rebellion. More than once the fanatical 
iconoclasm of a false Judaism, and the sensual nature worship of a 
false Hellenism, have troubled the development of Christian Art. 
No struggle indeed has been fruitless ; but even now we cannot dare 
to say that the office of Art is frankly acknowledged, or the exercise 
of Art spiritually disciplined. 

The development of Christian Art has been gradual, and it has Unequal 

been unequal in different branches. The social Arts, if I may so ee 
describe them, Music and Architecture, were soon welcomed by the tian Art, 
Church and pursued in characteristic forms. It is not too much to 
say that modern Music is a creation of the Church; and the con- 
tinuous and rich growth of Christian architecture up to the Renais- 
sance in types of varied beauty is in itself a sufficient proof of the 
power of the Faith to call out and train the highest genius in Art. 
The advance of painting and sculpture was checked perhaps in a 
great degree by the influence of Eastern asceticism. Both were 
treated as subsidiary to architecture, which was preeminently the 
Art of the Middle Ages ; but some of the single statues of the x1th 
century contain a promise, not yet fulfilled, of a Christian Art 
worthy to crown that of Greece. Meanwhile a new style of painting 
was being prepared by the illumination of manuscripts, in which not 
only scenes and persons but small natural objects, flowers and insects, 
were treated with the utmost tenderness and care. Here again the 
Renaissance checked the direct development of the twofold promise 
over which the student lingers in admiration and hope as he regards 
at Bruges side by side the works of Van Eyck and Memling. 

The forces of the Renaissance have not yet been completely Disturb- 
assimilated. The wealth of ancient material then poured at once a 
before Christian Artists hindered their normal progress; but they #ssence- 
have moved since along their proper lines and the Past contains the 
assurance that ‘all things’ are theirs. 

So much at least the history of Christianity fairly shews, that 
nothing which is human lies beyond its range. It lays the greatest 
stress upon practical duties, upon ‘the good part’ of moral discipline, 


but none the less it finds place for the satisfaction of what we regard 


366 THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


as less noble instincts. The single incident recorded in the Gospels 
in which the Lord received a costly offering seems to illustrate the 
principles which hallow even the simplest gratifications of sense. 
The Evan- When Mary lavished the precious spikenard over the Head and 
a Feet of her Master, ‘the house,’ St John tells us, ‘was filled with 
the odour of the ointment.’ It was natural that the thought of the 
apostles should find expression by the lips of Judas. ‘Why was not 
this ointment sold for three hundred pence and given to the poor?’ 
‘To what purpose was this waste?’ And the judgment was given: 
‘Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in 
the whole world, there shall also this that this woman hath done, be 
told for a memorial of her.’ The fragrance was most transitory, but 
it was diffusive: the waste was most complete, but it gave clear 
witness of love, of that highest love of which the chief reward is 
that it should be known that its object inspired the devotion of 
perfect sacrifice. So it is with every work of Christian Art. It 
aims not at a solitary but at a common enjoyment: it seeks to make 
it clear that all to which it is directed has a spiritual value able to 


command the completest service’. 


IV, 
Te oe Christianity, it has been seen, claims the ministry of Art in the 
1 . 
ea °" whole field of life. What then is the peculiar office of Art? It is 


in a word to present the truth of things under the aspect of beauty, 
to bring before us the ‘world as God has made it’ where ‘all is 
beauty.’ The fulfilment of this office involves the exercise not only 
of insight but of self-control. Man and nature are evidently dis- 
ordered. The representation of all the phenomena of life would not 
be the representation of their divine truth. Love therefore, a look- 


1 This is the lesson of the soul in that are 

Bhs Palace of Art: So lightly, beautifully built: 

‘Make meacottageinthevale,”shesaid, Perchance I may return with others 
‘*Where I may mourn and pray. there 


Yet pull not down my palace towers, When I have purged my guilt.” 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 367 


ing for the highest good of the whole, will guide and limit the search 
after beauty to which Art is directed. 


In the imitative arts, painting and sculpture, the effort to make The pecu- 


= ᾿ ᾿ rad Us ᾿ liar office 
visible the truth of God in man and in nature is immediate and of Art 

direct. In the creative arts, music and architecture, the effort is to ΡΈΕΙ ἐς 
find an expression, an embodiment, harmonious with the truth of a 


things for elementary emotions and wants. Men in society seek a 
common voice, a common home: the hymn and the temple belong to 
the first stage of the state. But in these arts there is necessarily 
more freedom and variety than in those which are directly imitative. 
The application of the general laws of Art to them is complicated by 
many physical influences. It is best then to endeavour to determine 
the office of Art by a consideration of the imitative arts, and speci- 
ally of painting which is both richer than sculpture in its effects and 
wider in its range. 


In three most suggestive studies of painters of the Renaissance Brown- 


᾿ Β ἫΝ ee ing’s reve- 
Browning has marked with decisive power the mission of Art, and agen of 
the grounds of its failure. He has not crowned the series by a por- Sates 


traiture of the ideal artist, but it is not difficult to gather his linea- 
ments from the sketches of the other three. In ‘Fra Lippo Lippi’ 
the poet vindicates the universality of Art answering to the fulness 
of life, and yet plainly indicates the peril which lies in this frank 
recognition of ‘the value and significance of flesh.’ In ‘ Andrea del 
Sarto’ he shews the power of faultless execution neutralised by the 
deliberate acceptance of a poor and selfish motive. In ‘ Pictor igno- 
tus,’ the loftiest ideal and the fullest power of imagination and exe- 
cution are supposed to be combined, but the artist shrinks from. 
facing a world sordid proud and unsympathising, and buries his work | 
in obscurity. 
It would not be possible to describe the artist’s feeling more truly Fra Lippo 


: ὡς τις Lippi. 
than in Lippi’s words : 


This world’s no blot for us 
Nor blank: it means intensely, and means good: 
To find its meaning is my meat and drink. 


So it is that for him to see the world is to see 


368 


Andrea 
del Sarto. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


The beauty and the wonder and the power, 
The shapes of things, their colours, lights and shades, 
Changes, surprises—and God made them all... 
... paint any one, and count it crime 
To let a truth slip. 
If it be said that Nature is before us, and that the artist can 
neither surpass nor reproduce it, the answer is complete : 
we’re made so that we love 
First when we see them painted, things we have passed 
Perhaps a hundred times nor cared to see;... 
. Art was given for that: 


God uses us to help each other so, 
Lending our minds out. 


It is therefore faithless disloyalty to the Creator to seek to ‘ paint 
the souls of men’ by disparaging their bodies. Even if such a thing 
as soulless beauty were possible, the devout spectator would ‘find 
the soul he wants within himself, when he returns God thanks.’ 

These pregnant words describe the manifold field of Art, its pecu- 
liar interpretative power, and its moral effect, but in connexion with 
a perfect, an unfallen, world. They take no account of the sorrows 
and failures which come from ‘ what man has made of man’; and the 
circumstances under which they are spoken give powerful emphasis 
to the reality of that disorder in life which imposes on Art the neces- 
sity of discipline. There must indeed be no violent suppression of 
any part of true nature in the endeavour to gain the highest lesson 
of earth, but the divine meaning must be sought through the traces 
of the divine ideal, so that the artist ‘makes new hopes shine through 
the flesh they fray.’ 

The failure of Lippi springs from a reaction against convention- 
ality. In the assertion of the divine glory of Nature he overlooks 
the reality of corruption. The failure and the success of Andrea 
del Sarto are of a different kind. There is in him no sense of an 
illimitable progress of Art as it ‘interprets God to men.’ ‘TI can do,’ 
he says, ‘do easily, 


what I know, 
What I see, what at bottom of my heart, 
I wish for, if I ever wish so deep.’ 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 369 


The last words give the clue to his position. He has deliberately, 
irrevocably, limited his ideal by an unworthy passion. In earth and 
in heaven, as he looks forward, he accepts defeat as the consequence : 
so he chooses. He has fettered himself and strives to think that 
‘God laid the fetter.’ 

But none the less he is conscious that his matchless power was 
given him for something nobler. He recognises truer greatness in 
pictures less perfect than his own. The complete fulfilment of his 


design is his condemnation : 


a man’s reach should exceed his grasp, 
Or what’s a heaven for? all is silver grey, 
Placid and perfect with my art—the curse! 


He has said of the Madonna, which was but the image of his wife, 
It is the thing, Love! so such things should be— 
but yet looking back to the early and unsullied days he thinks, ad- 
dressing Lucrezia, how he 


cowd paint 
One picture, just one more—the Virgin’s face, 
Not yours this time! 


The artist has need of discipline: he has need of devotion to an Pictor 
unattainable ideal: he has need also of un-selfregarding courage. The Ἰβμοίαο, 
pathos of earthly passion in the confession of Andrea is less touching 
than the self-effacement of ‘the unknown painter,’ who, conscious of 
power and purpose, keenly alive to the joy of triumphs which he 
might secure, yet shrinks from the cold hard criticism of the crowd, 
‘as from the soldiery a nun,’ and chooses for his works silent un- 
noticed decay. He has failed to acknowledge the reality of his 
mission. The question for him was not how men would judge him, 
whether ‘their praise would hold its worth,’ but whether he had a 
trust to discharge, different from that monotonous task which he 
took to himself, painting 


...the same series, Virgin, Babe and Saint, 
With the same cold, calm, beautiful regard. 


It might have been that ‘merchants would have trafficked in his 
heart’; but they could not have disguised the heart’s teaching. It 
W. J. 24 


370 


Beauty 
answering 
to a divine 
ideal the 
object of 
Art. 


Positive 
value of 
artistic 
discipline. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 
might have been that his pictures would have lived with those who 
count them for garniture and household-stuff, 


but no dull eye could have extinguished the light of his interpreta 
tion of life. The work of the artist is a battle, not without loss and 
suffering, and he must bear its sorrows, just as he must exercise the 
patient self-control of one who has to recover an image partly marred 
and defaced, and to keep in vigorous activity his loftiest aspiration. 

All nature, all life, so far as it can be presented under the form 
of beauty, is the field of Art. But the beauty which is the aim of 
Christian Art is referred to a divine ideal. It is not ‘of the world,’ 
as finding its source or its final measure there, but ‘ of the Father,’ as 
corresponding to an unseen truth. The visible to the Christian eye 
is in every part a revelation of the invisible. The artist, like the 
poet, sees the infinite in things, and, under the conditions of his 
works, suggests it. 

So far the artist’s pursuit of beauty is limited. The boundaries 
within which he is confined will not always be the same, but they 
will always have the same relation to moral discipline. They will 
correspond with the circumstances of the time. And the discipline 
of sense has a positive and not only a negative value. It brings 
into healthy action a power of goodness which a rigid asceticism 
keeps unused and tends to destroy. In this way Christianity is able 
to give back, as has been already indicated, what was lost by the 
corruption of the old Aryan passion for Nature. All that was at 
first referred to limited divinities is shewn to be essentially an ex- 
pression of one Divine Will. The spiritual signs may be greatly 
obscured: they may not be in every case distinctly discoverable ; 
but the assurance of the significance and purpose of the whole cannot 
but illuminate the study of every part. 

And while the field of Christian Art is in one sense limited by 
the recognition of a spiritual destiny of all its fruits, it is, in another 
sense, unlimited. The understanding of Nature is deepened and 
enlarged with the progress of life. Every discovery as to the history 


of creation, sooner or later, places new forces in the artist’s hands. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 371 


It may be some detail as to the formation of rocks, some law as to 
the arrangement of leaves and branches, some phenomenon of light 
or vapour, which has been more firmly seized; and shortly the 
painter’s interpretation of the landscape will offer a fuller truth. 
The instructed eye will discern the importance of some minute effect 
and the artistic instinct will know how to convey it to the ordinary 
spectator’. 

For the artist has both to interpret and to embody. He has to The Artist 
gain the ideal of his subject and then he has to present it in an cee 
intelligible shape. He has to give the right effect and to call out bee 
the right feeling. He has, as it were, to enter within the veil, and 
He 


The work of the photographer may 


coming forth again to declare his heavenly visions to men. 
is not a mirror but a prophet. 
help him, but it in no sense expresses his aim, which is not repro- 
He has abdicated the office of an artist 
who simply repeats for the mass of men what they see themselves. 


duction but translation. 


The artist bids them behold the ideal as it is his privilege to realise 
it. He strives to make clear to others what his keener sensibility 
and penetrating insight have made visible to him. There is, as in 
every true poem, an element of infinity in his works. They suggest 
something beyond that which they directly present: something to be 
looked for, and felt after, thoughts which they quicken but do not 
satisfy. So it is that 


Art may tell a truth 
Obliquely, do the thing shall breed the thought, 
Nor wrong the thought. 


This consideration places in a true light the danger of the Peril of 
popular realism in Art. There is a charm, no doubt, in being oo 
enabled to see some scene far removed from us in time or place as it 
would have presented itself to an ordinary observer; but exactly 


in proportion to the grandeur of the subject such a superficial 


τ When the Turner Collection was 
first exhibited at Marlborough House, 
I remember examining a sketch-book 
which contained some studies of laurel 
bushes. At the side was a note to the 


following effect: ‘N.B. The under-side 
of a laurel leaf does not shine.’ It 
would be interesting to know how 
Turner conveyed the effect which he 
noticed. 


24—2 


in serip- 
tural 
subjects. 


Illustra- 
tions from 
the treat- 
ment of 
the Ma- 
donna. 


The Cruci- 
fixion. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


portraiture is likely to be misleading. The spectator is tempted 
to rest in that which he understands at once; and the loftier though 
vague impression which he had before is lost and not assisted by the 
external details which profess to give the literal truth. Or, to put 
the truth in another light: the divine act was fitted to convey the 
divine meaning at the time of its occurrence, in relation to those 
who witnessed it, but a realistic representation could not give the 
same impression to a different age. 

This is signally the case with scenes in the Gospel History. The 
early Church by a right instinct refrained from seeking any direct 
representation of the Lord. It was felt that the realistic treatment 
of His Person could not but endanger the living sense of the 
Majesty which the Church had learnt to recognise. By no effort 
could the spectator in a later age place himself in the position of the 
disciples before the Passion and the Ascension. The exact repro- 
duction, if it were possible, of what met their eyes would not 
produce on him the effect which they experienced. The scene would 
require artistic interpretation in order that the idea might be pre- 
served. 

A great artist can alone determine what the law of interpreta- 
tion must be, and even then he will not himself always obey it. 
Two illustrations taken from the commonest of sacred subjects, the 
Madonna and the Crucifixion, may serve to bring out the thought 
which I wish to emphasise. In the Madonna della Seggiola Raffaelle 
has given an exquisite natural group of a Mother and Child, over- 
flowing with human tenderness, affection and proud joy, and we look 
no further: in the Madonna di San Sisto he has rendered the idea 
of divine motherhood and divine Sonship in intelligible forms. No 
one can rest in the individual figures. The tremulous fulness of 
emotion in the face of the Mother, the intense far-reaching gaze of 
the Child, constrain the beholder to look beyond. For him too the 
curtain is drawn aside: he feels that there is a fellowship of earth 
with heaven and of heaven with earth, and understands the meaning 
of the attendant Saints who express the different aspects of this 


double communion. It may well be doubted whether the Crucifixion 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 373 


is in any immediate shape a proper subject for Art. The image of 
the Dead Christ is foreign to Scripture. Even in the record of the 
Passion Death is swallowed up in Victory. And the material repre- 
sentation of the superficial appearance of that which St John shews 
to have been life through death defines and perpetuates thoughts 
foreign to the Gospel. The Crucifixion by Velasquez, with its over- 
whelming pathos and darkness of desolation, will shew what I mean’. 
In every trait it presents the thought of hopeless defeat*. No early 
Christian would have dared to look upon it. Very different is one 
of the earliest examples of the treatment of the Crucifixion on the 
Sigmaringen Crucifix®. In that life, vigour, beauty, grace, the open 
eye, and the freely outstretched arm, suggest the idea of loving and 
victorious sacrifice crowned with its reward. This isan embodiment 
of the idea: the picture of Velasquez is a realisation of the appear- 
ance of the Passion. 

If the view of Art which has been given is correct, its primary rather 

destination is public and not private, and it culminates in worship. not ΣΝ ΠΩ, 
Neither a great picture nor a great poem can be for a single possessor. 
So it has been at all times when Art has risen to its highest triumphs. 
But as an element of worship Art must be seen to be distinctly 
ministerial. In every form, music, painting, sculpture, it must point 
beyond the immediate effect. As long as it suggests the aspiration 
“to Thy great glory, O Lord,’ it is not only an offering, but a guide 
and a support. When it appears to be an end idolatry has begun. 

The artist, we have seen, must use every fresh help and dis- The Artist 
covery: he must make evident new thoughts or illuminate thoughts er 
which are imperfectly understood. It is clear therefore that he 
cannot follow one constant method in the fulfilment of his office. 
His work will be accomplished according to the conditions of his 
time. He will choose that mode of presenting the truth that he 
sees which is on the whole likely to be most effective. As a teacher, 


1 A small engraving is given in flict as over before the physical Death: 
Mrs Jameson’s History of the Lord, ii. ἕνα τί pe ἐγκατέλιπες ; 
205- 3 Mrs Jameson’s History of the Lord, 
2 The Lord’s words in the Gospel ii. 330. It is, I fear, doubtful whether 
narrative speak of the uttermost con- the youthful figure is correctly given. 


374 


Decorative 
Art. 


Summary. 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


with a limited and yet most noble range of subjects, he will consider 
how he can best serve his age. Nothing short of this conviction can 
overcome the influence of fashion, or sustain that resolute purpose 
which bears temporary failure. 

I have touched only upon the highest forms of creative Art. The 
principles by which these are animated apply also with necessary 
modifications to the humbler types of decorative art. The problems 
which these raise are in many respects more difficult and of wider 
application than those connected with the artistic interpretation of 
nature and life. It is no affectation to speak of the moral influence 
of colours and shapes in the instruments and accessories of every- 
day life. Here also there is room for a manifold apprehension and 
embodiment of truth. 1f once thoughtfulness of workmanship could 
be placed in general estimation before richness of material, a legiti- 
mate and fruitful field would be opened for domestic art. When 
Greek Art was greatest it was consecrated to public use; and one 
chief danger of modern society is lest the growth of private wealth 
should lead to the diversion of the highest artistic power from the 
common service, and at the same time leave the appropriate labours 
of domestic art unencouraged. 

This however is not the place to pursue the questions which are 
thus opened for inquiry. It is enough to have shewn that Christian 
Art is a necessary expression of the Christian Faith ; that the early 
antagonism of Christianity to ancient Art was an antagonism to the 
idolatry, the limited earthliness, of which it was the most complete 
expression ; that from the first beginnings of the Faith there were 
strivings after an Art which should interpret nature and life as a 
revelation of God, leading the student through the most patient and 
reverent regard of phenomena to the contemplation of the eternal ; 
that the consecration of Art, involved in the facts of the Christian 
Creed, limits the artist only in the sense that a clear exhibition of 
the ideal saves the beholder from following wayward and selfish 
fancies. 

The works of the greatest masters of the Middle Ages, of the 
greatest masters of the Renaissance, and the statement holds good 


THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO ART. 


still, shew how constantly foreign elements, fragments of the old life, 
not wholly transfigured, intrude themselves in that which as a whole 
belongs tu a new order. Here perhaps traces of sensuousness, there 
traces of unlicensed satire, reveal disturbing forces in the artist’s 
soul which are yet powerful enough to make themselves felt. But it 
is true, I believe, without exception that the noblest works, those on 
which we look with the deepest gratitude, drawing from them new 
powers of spiritual vision, new convictions of a spiritual world about 


us, are those which are most Christian. 
, 


375 


INDEX. 


Abstract forms, v. 4 

Albertus Magnus, 297 

Alexander of Hales, 294 

Antichrist, ii. 18; 92 ff. 

Aorist, ii. 7, 11; iii. 2; iv. 10; 57 ἔν; 
aor. and pres. ii.., 7; aor. and perf. 
iv. 3, 9, 13 £3 v. 9, 11; aor. imp. 
Vv. 21 

Architecture, Early Christian Church 
at Tyre, Jerusalem, 350 

Art, in relation to Christianity, 333 ff.; 
characteristics of Christian, 333; 
Greek, 338; Jewish, 336 

Article, i. z, 3; ii. 7; iii. 10; 2 J. 11; 
with predicate, iii. 4; absence of, i. 
1; iil. 9, 10, 14 

δελφός, ii. g; iil. 135 128 

ἀδικία, i. g 

ἀγάπη (ἡ dy. τοῦ θεοῦ), ii, 5; 11]. 16; 
130 ff. 

ἀγαπητός, li. 7; iv. 7; 35.1 

ἀγγελία, i. 5 

ἀγγέλλειν and compounds, i. 5 

αἴρειν, ili. 5 

αἰσχύνεσθαι ἀπό, ii. 28 

αἰτεῖν, αἰτεῖσθαι, V. 14 

αἰών, els τὸν αἰῶνα, ii. 17 

ἀκούειν ἀπό, ἀκούειν, 1, 53 V. 15 

ἀλαζών, ὑπερήφανος, ii. 16 

ἡ ἀλήθεια, i. 6, 8; 25.1 

ἀληθινός, θεὸς ἀληθινός, V. 20; 218 ff. 

ἀλλά, δέ, iv. 18; 3 J. 13 f. 

ἀλλ᾽ ἕνα, ii. rg 

ἀπαγγέλλειν, i. x 


ἀπατᾷν &., i. 8 

ἀφιέναι, ἄφεσις, i. g 

ἀπό, παρά, i. 5; 11. 273 iv. 21 
ἀποστέλλειν, πέμπειν, 124 f. 

ἅπτεσθαι, v. 18 

ἀρχή, dw ἀρχῆς, ἐν ἀρχῇ, i. τ᾿ ii. 7; iii. 8 
αὐτός, αὐτοί, i. 7; ii. 2, 253 iv. 5, 10 


‘ Believers,’ 129 

Biel, Gabr., 306 

Blood, The, of Christ, 34 ff. 

Bonaventura, 301 

‘ Brethren,’ 129 

Browning, on the failure of the artist, 
367 

βίος, ζωή, ii. 16; iii. 17 


Cain’s sin, iii. 12, 15 

Calvin, 316 

Calvinists, Later, 317 

Catholic (Epistles), xxviii 

Celsus on national religion, 257 

Children of God, 122 ff. 

Christ, Messiah, 198 ff.; Christ and 
Christians, ii. 20; iv. 9; Christ and 
the Church, 322 

Christianity, unique classes of, 255; 
universal, 242 ff.; absolute, 261 if.; 
aggressive, 264 ff.; spiritual, 267 ἢ. 

‘ Christians,’ 128 

Church, Relation of the, to Christ, 322 

Coming, The, of Christ, 126 f. See 
ἔρχεσθαι 

Consecration of the Emperors, 271 f. 


378 


Creation, Idea of, in St John, go 
Creation, Gospel of, 286 

καί, i. 2, 5 

καί---δέ, i. 3 

ἡ καρδία, iii. 20 

καταγινώσκειν, κατακρίνειν, iii. 20 
καθαρίζειν, 1. 7 

καθώς, il. 27 

κοινωνία, ἔχειν K., 1. 3 

κόσμος, li. 15 

κυρία, 2d. 4 

xapa,2d.12 

χάριν, iii, 12 

χάρις, 25.3; 3. 4 

χρείαν ἔχειν, ii. 27} iii. 17 
χρίσμα, li. 20; xlv. 


Days, The last, ii. 18 

Death, v. 16; sin unto, 209 ff. 
Desires, 62 

‘Disciples,’ 129 

Divus, use of, 278 

Dominus used of the Emperors, 268 
Duns Scotus, 305 

δέ, Vv. 20 

δεῖ, go 

διά, gen. acc., li. 12 

διάνοια, v. 20 

δίκαιος, i. 91 li. 29 

ἡ δικαιοσύνη, 111. 7, 10 
δοκιμάζειν, iv. 1 


Empires, The two, 250 ff. 

Eternal Life, v. 20, add. note 

Evil, Powers of, 89 f. 

Example, Christ as our, ii. 6 

ἐάν, ii. 29; ἐὰν οἴδαμεν, v. 15 

ἐκεῖνος, li. 6 ; ili. 3 

ἐκκλησία, ἡ ἐκκλησία, 3 J. 6, 9 

ἐκλεκτός, 2 J. 1,13 

ἔχειν τι, 1. 3, 8; 111. 3 

ἔχειν ἀπό, ἐκ, παρά, ii. 27 

εἰδέναι, lii. 5.; V. 13, 18 

εἴδωλα, ν. 21 

εἶναι ἐκ, ii. 16, 21; 111. 19; iv. 53 123; 
ἐν, ii. 53 πρός, i. 23 ἦν, i. 2; ἔστιν, 
standing first, i. 5 

εἰρήνη, 25.33 345.15 

ἐλπίδα ἔχειν ἐπί, iii. 3 


INDEX. 


ἐπαγγελία, ii. 25 

ἐπιδέχεσθαι, 3 J. 9 

ἐπιθυμία, ii. 16 

ἔρχεσθαι, ii. 18; iv. 2; v. 6; 2 J.7 
ἐρωτᾷν, ν. 6; 2d. 5 

ἐσχάτη (dpa), ii. 18 

ἐθνικός, 57. 7 

εὐοδοῦσθαι, 3 J. « 

ἐξελθεῖν ἐξ, li. 19 


Faith, iii. 23 

Faith and Confession, v. 1; and Know-- 
ledge, iv. 16 : 

Fellowship, v. 16; Divine, iv. 15 

Forgiveness, ii. 12 


Genius, The, of the Emperor, 279 
God, The kingdom of, 251 f.; the love 
of, iv. 11; the Revelation of, 166 f. 

Greek Art, 338 

yap, ὅτι, ii. 19 

γεννηθῆναι ἐκ, iii. g; 122 

γίγνεσθαι, ii. 18 

γίγνεσθαι πρός, 2 J. 12 

γινώσκειν, ii. 3, 13; 111. 6, 20; V. 2, 18; 
ἔγνων, iv. 8; ἔγνωκα, 11. 3; τὸν θεόν, 


iv. 6 f. 


Hero-worship, Growth of, 269 

Hope, iii. 3 

Humanity destined for union with God, 
287 : 

ἅγιος, ἁγνός, καθαρός, iil. 3 

ὁ ἅγιος, il. 20 

ἁγνίζειν, καθαρίζειν, iii. 3 

ἁμαρτάνειν, iii. 6 

ἡ ἁμαρτία, ἁμαρτίαι, i. 7; 111. 4 

ἁμαρτίαν ἔχειν, i. 8 

ἑαυτούς (of first and second persons), 
i.8 

ἱλασμός, ii. 2 

Wa, ili. τ, 113 iv. 21; v. 3 

ὁμολογεῖν, i. g; ii. 23; iv. 2 

ὥρα, gt 

ὁρᾷν, ἑωρακέναι, i. 1 

és ἄν, ii. 5 

ὅστις, 1. 2 

ὅταν, ἐάν, V. 2 

ὅθεν, ii. 18 


INDEX. 


ὅτι (8 τι) ἐάν, iii. 205 ὅτι, yap, ii, 19; 
ὅτι (recitative), i. 6 

οὗτος, V. 20; ἐν τούτῳ, ii. 3; ἐκ τούτου, 
ii. 33 ἷν. 6; καὶ τοῦτο, 3 J. 5 

υἱός, ii. 22 £.; ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ, iii. 8 

ὑπέρ, iii. 16 


Idolatry, Early Christian view of, 264 
ff. 


Imitation of Christ, ii. 6 

Incarnation, Aspects of the, 124 ff. 

Incarnation and Manifestation, i. 2 

tere, iii. 1 

᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστός, Jesus, Christ, Jesus 
Christ, i. 3; iv. 3; 136 


Jewish Art, 336 


Last, The, days, hour, ii. 18 
Law, the Law, iii. 4 

Light, i. 5 

λαμβάνειν ἀπό, παρά, ii. 27 
λέγειν, with inf., ii. 6 

λύειν, iii. 8 


Man, State of, 87 ff.; nature of, 134 ff.; 
made in the image of God, 319; the 
representative of Creation, 319 

Mosaics, Christian, 351 

μαρτυρεῖν, i. 2 

μένειν, ii. 5, το, 17; 111. 6 

μή, iv. 3; Vv. τὸ 

μή (forbidding), iii. 13 

μισεῖν, ii. g 

μονογενής, 169 ff. 


Naclantus, 312 

Name, Idea of, ii. 12; iii. 23; 3 J. 73 
136 ff. ; 243 ff. 

Names of the Lord, 136 ff. 

National Religion, 260 

Negative and positive statements, i. 5; 
v. 12 

νικᾷν, li. 13 

νίκη, Υ. 4 


Order of words, ii. 24, 28; iii. 4; V. 2,10 
Osiander, Andr., 313 
οἴδατε, οἴδαμεν, 111. 5; v. 18 


379° 


ὀφείλειν, ii. 6; 111. τό 

οὐ with πᾶς, ii. 19; after ἀρνεῖσθαι, il. 22 

οὐδέ, 11. 23 

οὐδείς, added to a negative sentence, 
Ls 


Painting, Early Christian, at Rome, 
341; Naples, 342 

Parentheses, St John’s use of, i. 2, 7; 
ii, ef 2 8... 

Passion, Treatment of the, in Christian 
Art, 359 

Persecution of Christians inevitable, 
254 

Peter Lombard, 294 

Picus of Mirandola, 311 

Plural, Use of, i. 4 

Polanus, 317 

Positive and negative statements, i. 5 ; 
v.12 

Prayer, iii. 22; v. 15 ff. 

παιδία, Texvia, il. 14 

πάλιν, ii. 8 

παράγεσθαι, il. 8, 17 

παράκλητος, ii. 1 

ἡ παρουσία, ii. 28 

παρρησίαν ἔχειν, li. 28; ill. 21 

πᾶς, use of, i. 7; ili. 3; V. 193 πᾶς...οὐ, 
ii. 19 

πατέρες, li. 13 

ὁ πατήρ, i. 25 ii. 22; 27 ff. 

περιπατεῖν ἐν, 1.6; 35.43 κατά, 5.6; 
abs., 11. 6; 3 9. 3 

πιστεύειν, iii. 23 

πιστεύειν εἴς Tt, V. 10; Twi, iii. 23; ὅτι, 
v. 13 πεπίστευκα, Υ. το 

πίστις, V. 4 

πιστός, 1. 91 345-5 

πληροῦν, τελειοῦν, OI D.; i. 4 

πνεῦμα, 135 

τὸ πνεῦμα τῆς πλάνης, τῆς ἀληθείας, iv. 6 

ποιεῖν Tt, i. 6, το; ill. 4, 7 

ὁ πονηρός, i. 13 

ποταπός, ili. 1 

πρεσβύτερος, 2 J. τ 

προάγειν, 25.9 

φαίνειν, ii. 8 

φανεροῦσθαι, i. 23 ii. 28; iii. 5; iv. 9; 
127 f. 


380 


φιλεῖν, 131 f. 

φιλοπρωτεύειν, 3 J. 9 

φίλος, 3 J. 15 

φῶς, i. 5 

ψευδοπροφήτης, iv. 1 

ψηλαῴᾷν, 1.1 

Ψυχή, 3.5.25 133: ψ. τιθέναι, iii. 16 


Righteousness, i. 9; ii. 1, 29; iii. 7, 10 
Rupert of Deutz, 289 


‘Saints,’ 129 

«Seeing ’ and ‘knowing,’ iii. 6 

Sculpture, Early Christian, 348 

Servetus, 315 

Sin, iii. 4; v. 17: 38ff.; unto death, 
209 ff. 

Socinus, F., 315 

Son, The, 137 

Son of God, The, iii. 8; 137 

Sonship, Tests of, ii. 29 

Style of St John, i. 2, 5; ii. 6; v. 1, 
12; Xxxix 

σάρξ, 1348. 

σκάνδαλον, ii. 10 

σκοτία, σκότος, 1. 6 

σωτήρ, iv. 14 

σφάζειν, iii. 12 

τὰ σπλάγχνα κλείειν, 111. 17 

συνεργός, 3. 8 


INDEX. 


Thomas Aquinas, 299 
Toleration, Roman idea of, 257 f. 
Treason, Roman law of, 282 
Truth, The, i. 8 

τέκνα θεοῦ, 1233 τοῦ διαβόλου, 111. 10 
τεκνία, παιδία, li, 12, 143 V. 21 
τέκνον, υἱός, iil. 1 

τελειοῦν, ἐπιτελεῖν, li. 55 GID. 
τηρεῖν, v. 18 

τηρεῖν, φυλάσσειν, ii. 3 

ὁ θάνατος, iii. 14 

θαυμάζειν el, 111. 13 

θεᾶσθαι, θεωρεῖν, 1. τ, 111. 17 

τὸ θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ, ii. 17 

θεός, ὁ θεός, 172 ff. 

θεωρεῖν, iii. 17 


Water, v. 6 

Wessel, J., 307 

Witness, i. 2; v. 7,9 

Word, The, i. 1, 10 

World, The, embodied in the Emperor, 
268 


fav, iv. 9 

gw7, i253 214 ff.5 ἡ ᾧ. ἡ αἰώνιος, ἡ αἰών. 
ᾧ,, id.; τῆς ζωῆς, i. τ; ἡ ζωή, iii. 14 

ζωὴ αἰώνιος, V. 11 





CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED ΒΥ C. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


MESSRS. MACMILLAN AND 60.5 PUBLICATIONS. 


Works by the same Author. 
Globe 8vo. 
ESSAYS ON THE HISTORY OF RELIGIOUS 
THOUGHT IN THE WEST. By Brooke Foss Westrcorr, D.D., 


D.C.L., Lord Bishop of Durham, Honorary Fellow of Trinity and King’s 
Colleges, Cambridge. 6s. 


TIMES.—‘ Their scholarly execution, their graceful style, their devout temper, and their 
wealth of suggestion and instruction, should render these masterly essays as welcome as if they 
were new to all serious readers.” 

SCOTSMAN.—“ Readers of all shades of opinion will recognise in the volume a work of 
high excellence, and find in it everywhere evidence of copious learning and sympathetic and 
penetrative insight.” 

8vo, Cloth. 


THE EPISTLES OF ST JOHN. The Greek Text, with 
Notes. Third Edition. 125. 6d. 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. The Greek Text, 


with Notes and Essays. 145. 


_ CLASSICAL REVIEW.—‘It would be difficult to find in the whole range of exegetical 
literature a volume at the same time so comprehensive and so compact. It possesses character- 
istics which will command for it the permanent attention of scholars.” 


Crown 8vo, Cloth. 


GENERAL SURVEY OF THE HISTORY OF THE 


CANON OF THE NEW TESTAMENT DURING THE FIRST FOUR 
CENTURIES. Sixth Edition. τος, 6d. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF THE FOUR 
GOSPELS. Seventh Edition. τος. 6d. 


THE GOSPEL OF THE RESURRECTION. Sixth 
Edition. 6s. 


THE BIBLE IN THE CHURCH. Tenth Edition, 18mo. 


4s. 6d. 
THE CHRISTIAN LIFE, MANIFOLD AND ONE. 
25. 6d. 


ON THE RELIGIOUS OFFICE OF THE UNIVER- 
SITIES. Sermons, 45. 6d. 
THE HISTORIC FAITH. Third Edition. 6s. 


THE REVELATION OF THE RISEN LORD. Fourth 
Edition. 6s. 
THE REVELATION OF THE FATHER. 6s. 
CHRISTUS CONSUMMATOR. Second Edition. 6s. 
SOME THOUGHTS FROM THE ORDINAL. Is. 6d. 
SOCIAL ASPECTS OF CHRISTIANITY. 6s. 
GIFTS FOR MINISTRY. Addresses to Candidates for 
Ordination. 15. 6a. 
THE VICTORY OF THE CROSS. Sermons Preached 
during Holy Week, 1888, in Hereford Cathedral. 35. 6d. 
FROM STRENGTH TO STRENGTH. Three Sermons 
(in Memoriam, J. B. D.), 25. 
WESTCOTT AND HORT’S GREEK TESTAMENT. 
Crown 8vo. 
THE NEW TESTAMENT IN THE ORIGINALGREEK. 
Revised Text. 2 vols. ros. 6d. each. Vol. 1. Text. Vol. II. The Intro- 


duction and Appendix. 
18mo. 


THE NEW TESTAMENT IN THE ORIGINAL GREEK. 
An Edition for Schools. The Text revised by Bishop Westcott and 
Dr Hort. 45. 6d.; roan, 55. 6@.; morocco, 6s. 6d. 


MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON. 


MESSRS. MACMILLAN AND ΟὉ.5. THEOLOGICAL 
BOOKS. 


By J. B. LIGHTFOOT, D.D. 
(Late Bishop of Durham). 


THE GALATIANS. A Revised Text, with Introduction, 


ἄς. Tenth Edition. 8vo. 125. 


THE PHILIPPIANS. A Revised Text, with Introduction, 
ἅς. Ninth Edition. ras. 


THE COLOSSIANS AND PHILEMON. A Revised 


Text, ἅς. Ninth Edition. 8vo. 12s. 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. PartI., S. CLEMENT 
OF ROME. A Revised Text, with Introductions, Notes, Dissertations, aad 
Translations. A New Edition. 2vols. 8vo. 32s. 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. ParriIl.,ST IGNATIUS 
—ST POLYCARP. Revised Texts, with Introductions, Notes, Disser- 
tations, and Translations. Second Edition. 3 vols. 8vo. 485. 


APOSTOLIC FATHERS. Abridged Edition. 8vo. 16s. 


Uniform Edition of BISHOP LIGHTFOOT’S Sermons. 


Crown 8vo, 6s. each. 


LEADERS IN THE NORTHERN CHURCH. 


SPEAKER,—“ These pages show clearly enough the leading ideas on which Dr Lightfoot 
wished to lay stress. In brief compass, but with great vividness, the salient characteristics in 
the history and work of Aidan and Oswald, Cuthbert and Bede, Richard du Bury, and Bernard 
Gilpin, John Cosin, and Joseph Butler are clearly unfolded, and the lesson of their lives is 
impressively enforced, and at the same time what Dr Lightfoot terms the ‘indomitable vitality of 
the Anglican Church’ is brought prominently into view.” 

SCOTTISH LEADER.—‘It is scarcely necessary to say that the volume is one of great, 
to many readers of singular, interest. Its history is thoroughly sound and impartial, and the 
practical lessons suggested by his several themes are delivered with earnestness and often with 
eloquence. But it is not for this that the book will be most read ; it is for the impressive historical 
figures tnat, called again to life in its pages, pass in a long procession and take the imagination 
captive.” 


ORDINATION ADDRESSES AND COUNSELS TO 
CLERGY. 


CAMBRIDGE SERMONS. 
SERMONS PREACHED IN ST PAUL'S. 


MANCHESTER GUARDIAN.—‘ There is hardly one of these sermons which has not 
an interest of its own, apart from its doctrinal or practical lessons.” 
_ CHURCH QUARTERLY REVIEW.— Bishop Lightfoot’s peculiar gifts, his historical 
imagination, his enthusiasm for his subject, the graces of his style, his attachment to the new 
home of his adoption, were all brought into full play when he wrote these fascinating sermons. 
ig We would advise all those who can appreciate sound scholarship and theology, elegance of 
style and fervour of piety, to read and re-read all the sermons.” 


SERMONS ON SPECIAL OCCASIONS. 


MACMILLAN AND CO,, LONDON. 


MESSRS. MACMILLAN AND CO.’S PUBLICATIONS. 


NEW AND CHEAPER EDITION. 
LIFE OF ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL TAIT, Archbishop 


of Canterbury. By RANDALL THomas Davipson, D.D., Bishop of Rochester, 
late Dean of Windsor, and WILLIAM BENHAM, B.D., Hon. Canon of Canter- 
bury. Third Edition. 2 vols. Crown 8vo, cloth. τος. net. 


By the late DEAN CHURCH. 
THE OXFORD MOVEMENT. TWELVE YEARS, 1833 
-1845. New and Cheaper Edition. Globe 8vo. 55. 
*,* A new volume of the uniform edition of Dean Church’s Miscellaneous Works. 


VILLAGE SERMONS. Crown 8vo. 6s. 

HUMAN LIFE AND ITS CONDITIONS. Sermons at 
Oxford, 1876-78, etc. Crown 8vo. 65. 

THE GIFTS OF CIVILISATION, and other sermons and 
Lectures delivered at Oxford and in St Paul’s Cathedral. Crown 8vo. 75. 60. 


THE DISCIPLINE OF THE CHRISTIAN CHARAC- 
TER. Crown 8vo. 45. 6d. 


ADVENT SERMONS, 1885. Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d. 


By Ven. Archdeacon WILSON, M.A. 
SERMONS PREACHED IN CLIFTON COLLEGE 
CHAPEL, 1879-83. Crown 8vo. 6s. Second Series. 1888-90. 6s. 
ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES. An attempt to treat some 

Religious Questions in a Scientific Spirit. Crown 8vo. 45. 6d. 
SOME CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE RELIGIOUS 
THOUGHT OF OUR TIME. 6s. 


By Rev. Professor SALMON, D.D. 


NON-MIRACULOUS CHRISTIANITY, AND OTHER 
SERMONS. 8vo. 65. 


GNOSTICISM AND AGNOSTICISM, AND OTHER 
SERMONS. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. 


BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 
SERMONS. By the Right Rev. JAMES FRASER, D.D., 


Second Bishop of Manchester. In 2 vols. I. University Sermons. II. 
Parochial Sermons. Edited by Rev. JoHN W. DIGGLE. 6s. each. 
THE LIGHT THAT LIGHTETH EVERY MAN: 


Sermons. By ALEXANDER RUSSELL, B.D., late Dean of Adelaide. With 
an Introduction by the Very Rev. E. H. PLumprre, D.D. Crown 8vo. 6s. 


WELLINGTON COLLEGE SERMONS. By the Rev. 


E. C. WickHaM, M.A., Master of Wellington College, late Fellow of New 
College, Oxford. Crown 8vo. 6s. 


LESSONS OF HOPE: Readings from the Works of 


FREDERICK DENISON MAuRICE. Selected by the Rev. J. LLEWELYN 
Davigs, M.A. Crown 8vo.  §s. 


SERMONS. By MARK PaTTISON, late Rector of Lincoln 
College, Oxford. Crown 8vo. 6s. ‘ 


THE COUNTRY CLERGYMAN AND HIS WORK. 


By Rev. HERBERT JAMES, M.A. Crown 8vo. 6s. 


THE SPIRITUAL LIFE AND OTHER SERMONS. 
By the Rev. J. E. C. WELLDon, M.A. Crown 8vo. 6s. 


MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON. 


MESSRS. MACMILLAN AND CO.’S PUBLICATIONS. 


Works by Dr TEMPLE, 
Bishop of London. 


SERMONS PREACHED IN THE CHAPEL OF RUGBY 
SCHOOL. 3rd and Cheaper Edition. Extra icap. 8vo. 45. 6d. 


SECOND SERIES. 3rd Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6s. 
THIRD SERIES. 4th Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. ὅς. 


THE RELATIONS BETWEEN RELIGION AND 
SCIENCE. Bampton Lectures, 1884. 7th and Cheaper Ed. Cr. 8vo. 65. 


By Dr MOORHOUSE, 
Bishop of Manchester. 


JACOB: Three Sermons. Extra fcap. 8vo, 35. 6d. 
THE TEACHING OF CHRIST. Its Conditions, Secret, 


and Results. Crown 8vo. 35. net. 


By The Rev. J. LLEWELYN DAVIES, M.A. 


ORDER AND GROWTH AS INVOLVED IN THE 
pies: CONSTITUTION OF HUMAN SOCIETY. Crown 8vo, 
cloth, 35. 64. 


THE EPISTLES OF ST PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS, 
THE COLOSSIANS, AND PHILEMON. With Introductions and Notes. 
Second Edition. 8vo, 7s. 6d. 


THE GOSPEL AND MODERN LIFE. Second Edition ; 


to which is added, Morality according to the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. 
Extra fcap. 8vo, 6s. 


SOCIAL QUESTIONS FROM THE POINT OF VIEW 
OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s. 


WARNINGS AGAINST SUPERSTITION. Extra fcap. 
8vo, 25. 6d. 


THE CHRISTIAN CALLING. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6s. 


By Archdeacon HARE. 


THE MISSION OF THE COMFORTER. New Edition. 
Edited by the Very Rev. E. H. PLumpTre. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 


THE VICTORY OF FAITH. Edited by the late Dean 


PLUMPTRE, with Introductory Notices by the late Prof. MAURICE and by the 
late Dean STANLEY. Crown 8vo, 6s. 6d. 


MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON. 





