=== Revelation 1 ===
Verses 1-20 

 The theme of this Book is found in its opening sentence, "The Revelation of Jesus Christ." This should be borne in mind from first to last, and our object should be to see Him as He is here revealed.
 
 John opens with a greeting to the seven churches in Asia, employing the words "grace" and "peace." He then emphasized that the words were from God through Christ, who claims to be "the Alpha and the Omega."
 
 The first Revelation of Jesus Christ is of Him in His glory as John beheld Him in the isle that is called Patmos. He is seen as "a Son of man," nevertheless, in His Person removed from all others in the amazing splendor of His glory. Human were breasts, and head, and hair, and eyes, and feet, and voice, and hands, and mouth. Superhuman was the golden girdle, and pure wool-whiteness, the flame of fire, the burnished brass, the many waters, the holding of the stars, the activity of the sword, and the splendor of the sun.
 
 The effect produced on John by the vision was to make him appear "as one dead." In that condition he heard the voice saying, "Fear not; I am the First and the Last, and the Living One; and I was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore, and I have the keys of death and of Hades." The touch of that Hand, and the sound of that Voice equipped John to receive the unveiling which through him was to be given to the churches. Immediately following, the commission to write was given to John, and the relation between the Lord, His ministers, and the churches was set forth.

=== Revelation 2 ===
Verses 1-29 

 The next movement in the Book consists of the unveiling of the Lord in His relation with the Asian churches, and therefore with His Church. It is impossible in such brief notes as these necessarily are to deal with the details of these letters. They may be treated in two ways. The first is the revelation of differing Church conditions continuing throughout the whole of the Christian era. The second is treating them as covering successive periods in that same era. We may now follow the latter method.
 
 The letter to the Church at Ephesus reveals apostolic conditions. The period was one of toil and patience, characterized by attempts to corrupt the doctrine by impure practice. It was a period in which the Church lost its first love.
 
 The letter to the Church at Smyrna covers the period of pagan persecution. The result of that persecution was the purification of the Church. The letter said that the Lord knew the difficulties of the situation and also that in spiritual power the Church was rich.
 
 The letter to the Church at Pergamum covers the period during which the Church passed under the blighting patronage of an earthly power. Satan, the prince of the world, had his throne at the heart of the Roman Empire, and there the Church dwelt. There were those faithful souls who held fast the Name, but the church received and tolerated evil things.
 
 The letter to the Church in Thyatira covers the central period in the Church's history. It was again a period of persecution. It covered what we speak of as the Dark Ages, in which a shameless harlot had usurped power in the Church of Jesus Christ.

=== Revelation 3 ===
Verses 1-22 

 The letter to the Church in Sardis covers the period of the Reformation. The Church was addressed as "dead." Yet there were things remaining which were not dead, but "ready to die." The address is largely to that living remnant. The charge to be watchful was not spoken to death, but to life. Christ's message to the period was a call to establish the things that remained.
 
 The letter to the Church at Philadelphia covers the great period of evangelization which, ushered in by the Puritan movement, broke into its full power in the Evangelical Revival. In this time the Church is seen following her Lord as never before and cooperating with Him in His purposes.
 
 The letter to the Church at Laodicea describes the final period prior to the advent of the Lord. It is, indeed, a dark and terrible picture. The Church is seen in a lukewarm condition. It is, however, the Church of the excluded Christ. Nevertheless, though excluded, He waits, knocking at the door and seeking admission.
 
 In these seven letters there are two statements of our Lord's common to every one: "I know," and "I will." Thus He is seen presiding over the affairs of the Church with perfect understanding of conditions obtaining in the churches, and declaring His authority as He condemns or commends. He walks in the midst of the lampstands, holding in His hands the stars, and reveals both His knowledge and His authority in every message.

=== Revelation 4 ===
Verses 1-11 

 This chapter introduces us to the Revelation of Christ in His government of all world affairs in which a most remarkable vision of the heavenly order is presented to us. Everything is seen as surrounding the throne. Four and twenty elders are seated round about that throne. In an inner circle are four living creatures, symbolically described as, the first like a lion, the second like an ox, the third as a man, and the fourth like a flying eagle. The whole interest centers in Him who sits on the throne. No suggestion of shape is given. The appearance is likened to that of two precious stones, jasper and sardius.
 
 The seer gazing on the heavenly order saw and heard perfect worship. The first note was uttered by the living ones; in the high and holy exercise they have no rest day or night, they offer glory and honor to Him who occupies the throne. This ascription is followed by prostration before the throne as elders cast their crowns before Him who sits thereon.
 
 So ends the vision of the essential heavenly order. The symbolism is majestic and sublime, and while there may be many differing interpretations, the fundamental truths are self-evident. At the center of everything is an occupied throne. Gathered around it are those who appreciate the character of the One enthroned, and submit themselves to His government. The light of that vision shone for the seer on all the darkness and the gloom which presently was to be revealed to him.

=== Revelation 5 ===
Verses 1-14 

 In this chapter we have John's vision of the heavenly arrangement for earthly administration. The program lies in the hand of the One who sits on the throne. It is written, but sealed, and none can know it. This fact produced a great sorrow in John, so that he wept much, seeing that none was able to take the book and unloose the seals in order that the heavenly program might be carried out on the earthly level.
 
 But now appeared the Lamb, whose advent was heralded by the most wonderful music it is possible to imagine. In the great movement the living ones and the elders and countless thousands of angels joined with the whole creation of God. As in the vision of the heavenly order in the previous chapter the fact of the Throne was the supreme revelation, here is revealed the equally glorious fact that the administration of the will of God in earthly affairs is committed to Christ.
 
 If indeed the earlier vision of the heavenly order prevents panic, this vision inspires the heart with thrills of joy, and, perforce, causes it to express itself in ceaseless song. To see the scroll on which is written the story of the divine purpose and program in the pierced hand is to prepare to sing the song of assurance amid all the strange and otherwise perplexing events which are to follow. Holiness is thus established on the central throne, and acts through Him who is forever the Exponent of the Infinite Love. This leaves no room for doubt that whatever happens will be in accord with strictest justice and tenderest compassion. Happy is the man who in the midst of all the problems and perplexities of the present age remains forever conscious of the established heavenly order and of the method of earthly administration.

=== Revelation 6 ===
Verses 1-17 

 We now pass to that section of the Book in which, under the heavenly order by earthly administration, events proceed toward the great consummation. The Lamb, holding the book, breaks the seals.
 
 The apostle heard the voice of one crying, "Come," and he beheld one who symbolized kingliness and goes "forth conquering, and to conquer." This is the Antichrist, Satan's most complete counterfeit of the Christ Himself.
 
 The breaking of the second seal reveals the issue of the reign of Antichrist, war and carnage. The earth is plunged into all the terrors of the despotism of false authority.
 
 The opening of the third seal brings a revelation of the want that follows war and carnage. A commercial despotism springs up which makes scarce the necessities of the millions and leaves untouched the oil and the wine which are the luxuries of the wealthy.
 
 The breaking of the fourth seal shows the fourth phase of misrule. Death in all its most terrible forms, by sword, famine, pestilence, and by wild beasts, sweeps away the fourth part of the earth.
 
 On the opening of the fifth seal John heard the cry of the saints slaughtered for their loyalty to the Word of God. The end is not yet.
 
 The opening of the sixth seal is immediately followed by premonitions of the coming One. Over all the government of the false are signs of the established order of the true. The earth itself is shaken, the sun is blackened, the moon becomes as blood, the very stars of heaven fall. The effect on earth is one of absolute and abject terror.

=== Revelation 7 ===
Verses 1-17 

 Under the sixth seal we have seen and heard the portents of coming divine intervention. At the sounding of the seventh seal these will be resumed. Chapter seven describes a pause, and first deals with events on earth. Restraining angels are seen holding in check the hurricane of divine judgment.
 
 After the account of the sealing of an elect number, the seer turns to contemplate a vision in heaven. It is that of a multitude so great that no man could number it. The multitude was diverse and yet unified. The diversity was of earth. National peculiarities, tribal characteristics, popular distinctions, and lingual differences are all still apparent. This earthly variety is incorporate in heaven's harmony. All stand before the throne, equally ready for service.
 
 This great multitude is composed of those who had come out of the great tribulation. They are now seen in heaven. Very beautiful and tender is the description of their condition. Service has superseded suffering, and all sorrow has been banished. The salvation they celebrate has lifted them to a place of immeasurable blessedness.

=== Revelation 8 ===
Verses 1-13 

 The seventh and last seal on the scroll is broken. On earth uproar and strife follow as at Babel, but in heaven silence for half an hour. Then follows the sounding of trumpets initiating activities leading to the ultimate manifestation of the King.
 
 At the sounding of the first trumpet a great storm breaks over the earth. At the sounding of the second, terrific disturbance occurs in the sea. At the sound of the third comes a terrible poisoning of the waters, bringing death. At the sounding of the trumpet of the fourth angel the third part of the light of the sun, moon, and stars is eclipsed. Through all these movements God is seen speaking to men of His throne and His power, which they have ignored. They all describe the operations of punitive judgment. Between the sounding of the fourth and fifth trumpets an eagle is seen proclaiming the coming of a threefold woe, but the fact of the proclamation is evidence of the long-suffering of God. That surely is the explanation of the eagle's proclamation in the midst of the sounding of trumpets.

=== Revelation 9 ===
Verses 1-21 

 At the sounding of the fifth trumpet the procedure of judgment takes a new form, passing from the material to the spiritual. The loosing of Satan is suggestive of the manifestation of satanic agency under the permission of God. Demons come forth, a terrible army, and scatter among the sons of men. It is noticeable that their power and time are limited by the government of God. The most terrible aspect of this visitation is that stricken men seek for death and are not able to find it.
 
 The sounding of the sixth trumpet introduces a period of judgment in more terrible forms. Immense hosts of hitherto restrained powers of darkness sweep over the earth. The worship of demons is clearly mentioned in this connection as one of the manifestations of evil. The unholy traffic with the spirit world will issue in the devastation of men by these very spiritual agencies.
 
 The closing declaration here is indeed terrible. Notwithstanding the awful dispensation of death, men unsmitten will not repent, but will continue in the same demon worship, with its consequent sins of murder, sorcery, and fornication.

=== Revelation 10 ===
Verses 1-11 

 Still under the period of the sixth trumpet, an interlude follows, chronicling events preparing for the sounding of the seventh and last trumpet. An angel comes to make a most important announcement, namely, that there shall be no more delay, that at the sounding of the seventh trumpet by the seventh angel the mystery of God will be finished.
 
 The seer was now commanded to take the book and to eat it. This figure of eating the book is familiar, and suggests the feeding of the soul on the Word of God. It is to that that the seer was called anew. Such feeding brings men into fellowship with Christ and God. There is a fellowship in joy, and the book is sweet; in sorrow also, for there is bitterness; and yet again in service, for those so eating must prophesy. This threefold experience comes to all who study the unfolding of divine purpose and process. The joy of the assurance of the divine government is ever accompanied by the signs of sorrow over the ruined and unrepentant and unbelieving. This twofold consciousness had its central manifestation in history when Jesus wept over Jerusalem and pronounced doom on it. Thus, as the revelation of the final judgments are about to be given, the man admitted to the secret of the Lord is called on to share in the joy and sorrow and service.

=== Revelation 11 ===
Verses 1-19 

 John is called on to measure the temple. In such measurements the court of the Gentiles is not to be recognized. It shows God dealing with the world through His chosen people.
 
 The account of the two witnesses must be taken in connection with the recognition of the temple. Their work will be to tell the will of God to an age in rebellion against Him. No malice is able to accomplish the destruction of these witnesses until their work is ended. When that is done they are slain, and there is the appalling sound of an apostate race rejoicing in the silencing of the voices of truth. The triumph of evil is terrible, but it is short- lived. Ultimately, the witnesses are raised from the dead and taken into the heavenly places. Through them God sets the supernatural ministry of truth over against the supernatural influences of demon power and worship. When at last evil seems to triumph, it secures its own defeat.
 
 At last, the seventh angel sounds and ushers in the final movements before the complete victory of the King. Voices in heaven declare that the rule of the world has been taken over by God and His Christ. The occasion gives cause for profoundest thankfulness, and the elders in the presence of the Supreme Royalty fall on their faces and worship. In their praise impending events are set forth, to be more fully described later.

=== Revelation 12 ===
Verses 1-17 

 In this and two subsequent chapters we have an interpolation in the account of the actual procedure. Two signs are described, a woman and a dragon, between whom is antagonism. Symbolically, it covers the story of the ages. The ultimate conflict between the dragon and the woman and the final defeat of the dragon will be shown presently. A description is given of a conflict between principalities and powers, fallen and unfallen. Perfect victory is gained through the blood of the Lamb and His word of testimony.
 
 The heavens rejoice, and all inhabiting them at the exclusion of the foe. He is cast down to the earth, and there is a manifestation of his malice and power on the earth level for the short time remaining to him. This power, however, will be definitely restricted. In this whole description there is a vivid unveiling of the nature and malice of the devil contending in the heavens to the last in terrible mental conflict with all the hosts of light; then, when finally cast out from the heavenly places, turning with renewed fury and force on those who have been associated with Christ. Amid these terrible scenes we are never allowed to lose sight of the might and majesty of God, who checks all the underworld of evil.

=== Revelation 13 ===
Verses 1-18 

 Still reviewing the process, a beast is seen as the agent of Satan. It is the Antichrist, who is counterfeit of Christ. He appears with the signs and symbols of kingship. He is characterized by attractiveness, for the whole earth wonders after him, and is constrained to worship. It is the ultimate blasphemy of the counterfeiting of God's anointed King by Satan.
 
 Yet another beast is portrayed, and in him the deception is still carried forward further. The methods he employs are a counterfeiting of those which mark the activity of the Spirit. Nevertheless, they are all rendered valueless by the erection at the center of his propaganda of an idol representative of his master. As the counterfeit ever demonstrates the existence of the genuine, so the genuine makes opportunity for the presence and activity of the counterfeit. Imitations have ever formed the gravest perils in the history of the Church and the world, and the devil's final attempt to gain the government of the race will thus be an appalling attempt to imitate the Person of God's crowned and anointed King. The mental enlightenment of the race by that time will admit of no positive denial of the existence of God or of the reality of the spiritual. The world, therefore, must be deceived by misrepresentation.

=== Revelation 14 ===
Verses 1-20 

 The attention of the seer was now turned again to the heavenly order. The redeemed are seen standing with the Lamb, a company of obedient souls who follow Him "whithersoever He goeth."
 
 In distinction from the seventh angel who had sounded the trumpet John now refers to "another angel." At this point the unfallen angels are described as exercising a remarkable ministry on earth. The first of them proclaims eternal good tidings. Yet another proclaims the fall of Babylon. The Gospel calling men to submission having been sounded, and the defeat of Babylon announced "another angel, a third," goes forth with a message of warning. In this proclamation the continuity of the divine recognition of human will is evident. All are called on to choose. The beast and the prophet insist that men receive their mark, and those refusing are slain. On the other hand, God's angel messenger warns against receiving that mark.
 
 It is in that connection that it was announced, "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth." To those who through terrible suffering are faithful unto death will be granted the way of entry on the higher service.
 
 A double view of impending judgment is given in the figures of the harvest and the vineyard. As to the harvest, it is briefly stated, "He that sat on the cloud thrust in His sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped." That sweep of the sickle in the right hand of the Son of man is a perfect symbol of the final and all-inclusive judgment. The figure of the vintage is an angel holding a sickle and gathering "the clusters of the vine of the earth."

=== Revelation 15 ===
Verses 1-8 

 Seven angels having seven plagues constitute that which "finished the wrath of God." First, the seer beheld the sea of glass and, standing by, the victorious host who had overcome the beast. They are seen, not as defeated and killed, but as triumphant and living. They sing the song of Moses, which is the song of law, and the song of the Lamb, which is the song of love. They have learned perfectly how law and love mingle and merge in the divine economy. The burden of song is praise to the Lord God Almighty. His words, His ways, His character, His acts are all referred to. Through all the terrible times of stress and strain these souls have walked by faith.
 
 Now for them at last faith is lost in sight, and they chant the praise of God whom they served even at the cost of suffering and death.
 
 Following this vision of the victorious hosts, John beheld the opening of a temple in heaven. It is "the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony." From it come the seven angels having the seven final plagues. To these angels the bowls of wrath are given by one of the living ones. Behind these angels is seen in the temple the glory of God in such magnificence and majesty that none can know it until the judgment is ful6lled.

=== Revelation 16 ===
Verses 1-21 

 A condensed and graphic description of the processes of judgment on the rebellious and sinful race follows. Evil has wrought itself out to its most terrible expression, and now it is to be smitten without mercy.
 
 Everything opened with a great voice sounding from the temple. Terrible physical suffering follows the pouring out of each of the first four bowls. The fifth angel pours his bowl, and the kingdom of the beast is wrapped in darkness. Notwithstanding the unimaginable terror of their condition, the evil men still "blasphemed the God of heaven," and "they repented not of their works."
 
 The sixth angel pours his bowl, and there is a change in the method of judgment. The great river Euphrates is dried up. The drying up of this river makes easy the gathering together of the kings of the earth to do battle against the hosts of God. Then comes Har-Magedon.
 
 In the midst of all this John seems to hear a word of Christ, and answers it in a parenthesis. It announces His coming, and pronounces blessing on those who watch. In all these processes of judgment it would seem that a remnant was continually being lifted into the position of submission and loyalty, and every now and again some such word as this declares the watchfulness and tenderness of God and His readiness to receive and rescue from the judgments those who turn to Him.
 
 The seventh angel pours his bowl upon the air, and the voice from the temple is again heard crying, "It is done." The all-permeating power of God which has operated in beneficent gentleness now shakes the earth, and the judgment of Babylon takes place. Yet again it is written that men still blaspheme God.

=== Revelation 17 ===
Verses 1-18 

 We now come to the true unfolding of the nature of Babylon and the detailed account of the judgment to fall on her. The name on the forehead of Babylon commences with the word "Mystery." Babylon stands for the whole system of organized godlessness in the history of the human race. In its course it has been surrounded by every kind of material splendor, "arrayed in purple and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls." Through the ages, men turning from the vision of God have seen only the material glory of ail.
 
 As the seer gazes on the fearful vision he wonders with a great wonder.
 
 The angel then proceeds to explain the meaning of the vision. The beast represents the temporal authority which has been the strength of all spiritual harlotry. The heads refer to successive world powers which had risen and fallen. The powers having existed and passed at the time of John's writing were Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, and Greece. The one then existing was Rome, and still there was one to come. Ten kings remained who would finally act with the beast, having one mind with him. These will act against Babylon, and also against the Lamb, but He will overcome them.
 
 Very striking is the seer's declaration of the overruling of God in the words, "God did put it in their hearts to do His mind, and to come to one mind, and to give their kingdom unto the beast." Thus the angel's explanation ends with a manifestation of the perpetual truth that all godlessness carries within itself the elements of its final defeat and overthrow.

=== Revelation 18 ===
Verses 1-24 

 The vision of the destruction of Babylon as directly resulting from the government of God is now given. It is announced, "Fallen is Babylon." Her condition is described as that of a habitation of demons, the prison of unclean spirits. Nations, kings, and merchants who have lived and ruled and traded on the principles of Babylon are involved in her fallen condition. A remnant is called out from Babylon before the destruction comes. The angel pronounces a retributive sentence, "As she rendered . . . according to her works."
 
 The fall of the city produces entirely opposite effects on earth and in heaven. The earth is plunged into mourning. The heavenly and spiritual world rejoices. From the beginning, Babylon had been in opposition to heaven. It had lived under the impulse of things seen, while denying the unseen things. At last it is overthrown, and there is rejoicing of the righteous.
 
 A symbolic act follows, the casting of a great millstone into the sea by an angel. The result is that Babylon "shall be found no more." The overthrow is to be absolute, irrevocable. The reason for this is stated as threefold, first, "Thy merchants were the princes of the earth"; second, 'With thy sorceries were all the nations deceived"; finally, "In her was found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all that have been slain upon the earth."

=== Revelation 19 ===
Verses 1-21 

 We now come to the things leading up to the establishment of the Kingdom. There are three great movements of praise: one by a great multitude who have been slain; the second by the elders and the living ones; finally, a mighty chorus which John describes by a threefold similitude as "the voice of a great multitude," "the voice of many waters," "the voice of mighty thunders." This precedes the marriage of the Lamb. The harlot is no more. The true Bride is manifest.
 
 A word of blessing is pronounced on those bidden to this marriage ceremony.
 
 Now comes the actual manifestation of Jesus to the world, and the judgment already foretold is described from the standpoint of His activity. The principle of His procedure is that He is "faithful and true" in character, and judging in righteousness in conduct. On His head are many diadems, suggesting His imperial sway over every realm of life. His name is "The Word of God." On His thigh is written "KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS." This glorious King in His manifestation is accompanied by His armies.
 
 As the heavens are opened, and the King and His armies are manifested, an angel is seen standing in the sun, and in figurative language is heard announcing the coming victory. The massed powers of godlessness are gathered with the awful purpose of making war against the true King. The battle is immediately joined. There is no indecision, no varying fortunes. The King and His armies are supernatural. It is the hour when heaven is touching earth, and the victory is with heaven.

=== Revelation 20 ===
Verses 1-15 

 Victory having been gained over the earthly manifestation of godlessness, it remains to deal with the power lying behind. The archenemy is described as "the dragon," "the old serpent," "the devil," and, finally, as "Satan." In this grouping of names is a remarkable unveiling of the very essence of evil.
 
 A brief and the only account of the thousand years follows. It will be a time of perfect earthly government under the King appointed and anointed by God. That government will be administered by those who have lived by faith in the supernatural.
 
 The description then turns to millennial issues. Evidently even during that period there will be those who have never submitted to essential righteousness. Satan is loosed out of prison to gather them together, and once more they act in definite hostility to the reign of righteousness. The issue is that Satan loses his usurped dominion forever. He is nevermore to be god of the world nor prince of the power of the air.
 
 Then follows the account of the great assize. Books are opened, and a book. In the books things are written. Those whose names are in the book enter into blessedness. Those whose names are not found entered there are judged according to the things written in the books.
 
 There comes a final movement. Death and Hades are cast into the lake of fire. Deepest death would seem to consist in the destruction of the possibility of dying. Beyond these words it is impossible to go in speculation, of hope or despair. Whatever that final sentence may mean, it is the sentence of Him who occupies the Great White Throne.

=== Revelation 21 ===
Verses 1-27 

 The endless end of evil has passed before the vision of the seer, and he now observes the resultant order. The holy city appears. Toward a city of God men had looked through long generations. Now it is manifested. God comes to abide with men. There is a new order of things, characterized by laughter without tears, life without death, singing without mourning, content without crying, pleasure without pain.
 
 As John beheld the vision he heard a voice saying, "Behold, I make all things new," and he was charged to write. All things come to pass, because He is the Alpha and the Omega.
 
 As one of the angels who had the seven bowls had summoned the seer to behold the great harlot, so now the same, or another of the seven angels, summoned him to behold the Bride in the glory of the great city. Radiant indeed is the revelation. It is a city of exclusion, having a wall great and high; and of inclusion, having gates opening in every direction. The names of the tribes on the gates suggest the varied temperaments of human life made pure as incorporated in the new social order. The names of the apostles of the Lamb on the foundations signify that the service of suffering has been the very foundation on which the city is built. No temple of localized worship is found, but the presence of God is everywhere known and felt. Beyond the city is the new earth, with nations and kings walking in the light of the, glory of God. Excluded from it are all unclean things.

=== Revelation 22 ===
Verses 1-21 

 Still gazing at the city, the seer beheld the great river of water of life. On its banks is the tree of life, yielding fruit, and leaves for the healing of nations. And once more the apostle declares there shall be no more curse.
 
 The great unveiling is accomplished. It ended with the declaration of the established Throne, and of the unending reign of the saints. What follows is of the nature of ratification and enforcement. The divine word concerning the authority and value of the book is that the words are "faithful and true." In order that those who have received the unveiling should ever be on the alert, it is announced, "Behold, I come quickly." The word "quickly" might with accuracy be rendered "suddenly." A blessing is pronounced on those who keep the words of the prophecy.
 
 John now adds his own name to the ratification of the book, declaring that he had heard and seen all of which he had written.
 
 The angel charged him not to seal the words of the prophecy, and the tendency to permanence of character is revealed (verse Rev 22:11 ).
 
 Following the charge of the angel, once again the voice of the great unveiled One is heard reaffirming the suddenness of His coming, and declaring that His reward is with Him. In majestic simplicity He introduces Himself as "I, Jesus," and describes Himself in terms of mystical magnificence as the "Root of David," and, moreover, as David's Offspring.
 
 John writes his solemn testimony against tampering with this narrative of unveiling. The final announcement of Jesus is, Yea, I come quickly." To this John writes in reply, "Amen, come, Lord Jesus." This is the perfect acquiescence of the trusting sod.
 
 The wonderful book ends with the simplest of benedictions: 'The grace of the Lord Jesus be with the saints, Amen."
