=== GENESIS 1 ===
Verses 1-31

	 The opening sentence of the Book of Genesis is an interpretation of the fact "that what is seen hath not been made out of things which do appear" ( Heb 11:3 ), and accounts for the things which are seen. The whole chapter, and, indeed, all subsequent Scripture, must be read in the light of this statement as to origins. This sentence is followed immediately by a declaration, without detail, of a cataclysm which overtook the earth. It then proceeds to show how the God who created, restored the earth to fruitfulness and order. God is here revealed in the threefold fact of His existence. The chaotic earth is seen held in the embrace of the Spirit, who is described as brooding over it. The Word of God is heard expressing the will of God. Thus God is seen speaking the purpose of His mind in word and doing His will though the activity of the Spirit.

	 The purpose of this restoring process is seen in the creation of an entirely new being, Man. This being is revealed as having direct relationship with God, being made in His image and likeness. Here the deepest truth concerning man's nature, that of its spirituality, is not declared. Consequently there is here no reference to his moral nature, except as both these may be implied in the fact of his being in the image and likeness of God. The chapter reveals a universe rooted in the thought and activity of God, and of man as being His offspring. The acceptation of these declarations gives to the mind a sense of the majesty of all being, thus creating a radiant background against which the darkness of subsequent history will be seen and understood more clearly. Any other view of the universe and man fails to understand the real nature of evil.

=== GENESIS 2 ===
Verses 1-25

This chapter gives us a fuller account of man. Three distinct movements are chronicled in the brief but comprehensive account.

First, "Jehovah God formed man of the dust." The Hebrew word "formed" suggests the figure of the potter, molding to shape, material already existing. It is a scientific fact that all the elements in man's physical life are found in the dust of the ground.

Second, "Jehovah God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life." This is the final divine act, mysterious and incomprehensible, indicating the communication to the dust, of the very life of God.

Finally, "man became a living soul." The word nephesh, here translated "soul," refers to complete personality. This being is now placed in an environment which demands his care and cultivation. His relationship as subject to the sovereignty of God is sacramentally symbolized for him in a tree. He can only fulfil the highest function of his being only as he is living and acting within the will of God. By supernatural action, the man is completed in the woman. Here the declaration is most significant. "God created man in His own image, in the image of God created He him; male and female created He them" ( Gen 1:27 ). In God are fatherhood and motherhood, parenthood and childhood. This great chapter on human nature ideally reveals it in its relationship with God in being and in purpose. The ultimate meaning of this is not revealed here and will be known only in the ages to come, when, beyond all failure, the divine thought and purpose are fulfilled.

=== GENESIS 3 ===
Verses 1-24

Here begins the second section of the Book of Genesis. As the first has answered questions concerning creation, the second replies to questions asked in the presence of sin and suffering and sorrow.

The story of this chapter is simple and yet sublime in its interpretation of human history as we are familiar with it. Man is seen in individual innocence and racial immaturity. To him an evil personality, radiant in appearance, makes an appeal. The appeal, in the last analysis, is a questioning of the goodness and moral integrity of God.

The fall of man consisted in consent to listen to any such appeal and in the consequent failure of faith, which issued in definite breaking of law. At once fear in the human soul is manifested. Faith and fear are mutually exclusive. So long as faith governs, fear is impossible. Man may attempt to hide from God, but he cannot escape Him, in that fact lies man's only hope.

God is revealed wondrously in His dealings with the situation. His first question thrills with pathos, 'Where art thou?" In all that followed there is evident the differentiation of the strictest justice. The serpent is cursed. The sentence on the woman is that in the distinctive exercise of her nature, that of motherhood, she shall be wrapped in sorrow. In that connection, however, the first prophetic word of hope was uttered. Of the seed of the woman shall come the Deliverer. The sentence on the man is that, in the highest activity of his life, that of toil, he shall know weariness. Behind all the movements of law there moves the heart of love, and this is finally seen in the exclusion of Adam and Eve from the tree of life in order that they might not perpetuate the conditions into which they had passed as the result of sin.

=== GENESIS 4 ===
Verses 1-26

The degeneration of the first man and woman was transmitted, the firstborn being manifestly an inheritor of the fallen nature of his parents. His mother named him Cain, intimating a hope that the seed had come which should bruise the head of the serpent. How little she knew of the nature of her own sin. Thus from the beginning sin manifested a wayward rebelliousness which ever tends to break the heart of fatherhood and motherhood; and experimentally some of the consciousness of the pain of God over their own sin would be revealed to these first parents. Abel means vanity, and suggests the disappointment which had come to Eve.

Sin is seen at once, breaking up the family ideal in the story of Cain and Abel. Death, the penalty of sin, is first executed by the hand of a sinner.

Jehovah intervenes, dealing with Cain in strict justice. His going out from the presence of God was a willful severance of himself from the divine government and from response to its claims.

The chapter records with perfect fidelity the story of human progress, notwithstanding its godlessness. Here begins a history which continues until this hour-marriage, and children, and the building of a city without God. The origin of colonization and commerce is seen in Jabal, who "was the father of such as dwell in tents and have cattle." The initiation of what we may speak of as the fine arts was revealed in Jubal, "the father of all such as handle the harp and pipe." Here, too, we find the beginning of mechanical skill, as Tubal-cain was "the forger of every cutting instrument of brass and iron." In Lamech we have the portrait of a man at the pinnacle of such success. He repeated Cain's sin, but now evidently without any remorse, for in poetic language he is heard defending himself and boasting in his safety.

A third son is born to Adam and Eve, Seth; and the new line commences. Through Abel there is no succession. The posterity of Cain will ultimately be swept away in the Flood. Through Seth the seed of the woman will be preserved toward the ultimate victory.

=== GENESIS 5 ===
Verses 1-32

In this chapter we have a condensed account of fifteen centuries in human history. The ruin of the race had come through man's belief in the devil's lie. "Ye shall not surely die." The repetition throughout the chapter of the sentence, "And he died," indicates the vindication of God against the lie of the devil. The chapter with its account of the ages of these men is of value as it reveals how early history was preserved. Adam was yet alive when Methuselah was born, and Methuselah was yet alive when Noah was born. Thus two persons form a link of connection between Adam and Abraham, a span of two thousand years. The story of creation and the fall may have been told by Adam to Methuselah, and by him to Noah. Noah still lived to be contemporary with Terah, the father of Abraham. This, of course, is merely suggestive, but does indicate a possibility.

It will be realized that the supreme glory of this chapter is its brief but wonderful picture of Enoch. One man who though living contemporaneously with Lamech yet lived in conformity with the will of God in life and conduct as it is so remarkably expressed, "Enoch walked with God." As a result of this fellowship in life, he was "translated that he should not see death," God thus indicating, even in the midst of all the darkness, His power to triumph by grace over the consequences of evil when man submits himself to Him on the basis of faith.

=== GENESIS 6 ===
Verses 1-22

With the passing of the centuries, the degeneration of the individual and the family became that of society. There had been intermixture between the descendants of Cain and those of Seth, resulting in the Nephilim. These were strong and godless men, ultimately swept away by the Flood.

The description of life is a terrible one. "The wickedness of man was great" that describes the outward condition; "every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually" that describes the inward character. The completeness of the depravity is revealed in the use of the words, "every," "only," "continually." God was defied and the flesh with its passions and lusts was regnant.

All this "Jehovah saw." His fiat went forth that His Spirit should not always strive with man, and the limit of one hundred and twenty years was set.

Amid this degeneration Noah is seen as a man walking with God. With this man God holds communion and brings him into co-operation with Himself for the preservation of a seed and the bearing of testimony. The closing declaration, "Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he," is a remarkable revelation of his faith. It was a period of strange experiences. Strong men and godless were living and flourishing in all things mental and material. There is no doubt that for material gain they co-operated with Noah in the building of the Ark, which they must have held in supreme disdain. Nevertheless, in every nail driven and foot of work completed, space was given to them to repent. Noah preached righteousness by the very building of the Ark. Yet it would seem as though none profited, save Noah and his family; and his carpenters were finally destroyed outside the Ark which they had helped to construct.

=== GENESIS 12 ===
Verses 1-20

At this point begins the actual historic movement toward the coming of the Redeemer. One man was called to the realization of the true principle of life. The call was personal and purposeful. Abram was commanded to sever the ties of all past associations and to go forth, governed wholly by the will of God. The personal element is clearly marked in the words, "Get thee out . . . I will show thee . . . I will make of thee . . . I will bless thee." It was none the less a purposeful call. The personal going was to result in the creation of a nation through which all the nations of the earth were to be blessed.

Abram's obedience was immediate. Arrived in the land, God appeared to him again and declared that that land was to be given to his seed. All the appearances of the hour were against the possibility of the fulfilment of that promise, for "the Canaanite was then in the land." Faith conquered in spite of appearances as Abram pitched his tent, a sign of possession, and built his altar, a symbol of allegiance

Once more we confront human failure in Abram's deflection from the life of faith. In the presence of famine he attempted to secure his own safety by going into Egypt. As the result of this we have the startling picture of the chosen mother of the promised Seed in the harem of Pharaoh. God however guards the larger issue of His purpose against the mistakes of the instrument, and by plaguing Pharaoh's house brought about the deliverance of Abram.

It is ever a humbling thing when a man of faith who stands for the principle and purpose of God is rebuked by someone outside the covenant for lack of loyalty to truth. Yet this is exactly what happened in the case of Abram.

=== GENESIS 22 ===
Verses 1-24

In this chapter we have the account of the seventh appearing of Jehovah to Abraham and it is that of his supreme testing and consequent bringing into fellowship with God. It must have been in many ways a desolating trial, without apparent reason, coming suddenly and without explanation. Nevertheless, it is the story of the triumph of faith. Abraham passed through the fiercest fire and endured the greatest pressure as his faith was put to the most tremendous strain.

The statement that "God did prove Abraham" is in itself suggestive. He confers honor where He proves. He did not prove Lot. Sodom did that. God proves the man who is proof against Sodom. The outstanding revelation of Abraham is that of one who walking by faith and not by sight rendered active, ready, and quick obedience. The man who really believes in God is always able cheerfully to obey Him, because present sacrifice is set in the light of the necessity for the fulfillment of God's declared purpose. Abraham rested in God rather than in any blessing He bestowed, even though that were Isaac. Faith depending on the divine promises saw beyond the sacrifice and was able to obey.

It may be that the story can never be interpreted in the realm of the natural, and the only thing we can say about it is that through the experience Abraham was brought into fellowship with the God who so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son.

The testing was followed by the repetition to Abraham of all the great and gracious promises already made to him.

=== GENESIS 37 ===
Verses 1-36

From this point in the sacred narrative, though Jacob appears more than once, for a time the history centers around Joseph, and it is certainly safe to say that in many aspects no more remarkable figure appears on the pages of Old Testament history.

Joseph is seen here, first as the object of his father's love, a love which may surely be accounted for by the fact that he was the first-born of Rachel, and also to the ingenuous simplicity of his disposition and the strong integrity of his character.

If the marginal reading of the Revised Version be correct, and in all probability it is, that his father made him "a long garment with sleeves," this probably suggests his appointment to a position of trust and oversight, for such a garment was the garment of a prince. Naturally imaginative and romantic and given to day dreams, through this avenue God suggested his coming position and power. With simple artlessness he told his dreams to his brethren. The character of the man as subsequently revealed makes it impossible to believe that he had any ulterior motive in this telling of his dreams. The construction his brethren placed on the dreams was undoubtedly the true one; but was most likely arrived at as the result of the position he occupied among them by appointment of his father, and by their interpretation of his feeling by their own jealousies.

The story of his betrayal is at once a revelation of their malice and of the divine determined counsel to move forward to ultimate realization of purpose.

=== GENESIS 7 ===
Verses 1-24

At last the work was completed, and the man who by faith had done that which was evidence of his folly in the eyes of the world entered the Ark, leaving behind him all his possessions.

Then came the swift and final judgment of God against the corrupted race.

The righteousness of this judgment can be challenged only by such as fail to notice carefully the corruption of the race as to its nature and extent. The only way in which it was possible to ensure the eventual purity of the race, and thus realize the divine ideal m its creation was by the destruction of that which was utterly and irrevocably corrupt.

Love, illumined by light, acts not merely in the interests of the present moment, but of all the coming centuries. There is a severity which is of the very essence of tenderness; and the story of the Flood is an instance of the actuality of the love of God.

Questions as to the universality of the Flood are not relevant to the story as it is written in Genesis. All that this story declares is that the destruction was coextensive with the region occupied by man. The Hebrew word used uniformly for "the earth" through this section, erets, is used sometimes of the whole earth, sometimes of a part of it, as we may use the word 'land." All that this account demands is that we should understand that a corrupt race was swept away and a godly remnant spared.

=== GENESIS 8 ===
Verses 1-22

Upborne on the billows of judgment, the Ark rode securely, holding within it the nucleus of a new departure in human history. When the work of judgment was fully accomplished, the waters decreased, and the voice that had commanded Noah to build the Ark and to enter therein called him forth.

What a stupendous moment it was in the history of the race and in the experience of this man when he emerged from what had been practically a prison, and yet the vantageground of God for the continuity of His plan and purpose for humanity.

He who by faith had renounced everything in obedience to God, in spite of all appearances, now stepped forth, the sole possessor of the earth. A new day was dawning for humanity, a day of new opportunity in which men would live with history's testimony to the fact of the divine government and judgment, forever speaking to them of the issues of sin and of the impossibility of escape from the government of God.

The first act of Noah as he found himself delivered from judgment and established in possession was a reaction of response and in itself was most significant. His first look was Godward, and his first act the erection of an altar and the offering of sacrifices.

This attitude and action were answered by a declaration of God which was full of grace. His knowledge of the fact of sin still remaining is declared, but henceforth it was not to be the gauge of His dealing with man. In spite of sin the promise was made that the natural order should continue, seasons come and go, and the day and night should not cease. In other words the declaration was that the earth was not to be involved in the chaos which followed the primal cataclysm ( Gen 1:2 ), but continue to be the sphere for carrying out His purposes in humanity.

=== GENESIS 9 ===
Verses 1-29

The new order in human affairs was initiated by the bestowment of a blessing on Noah and his sons. The first note of change is seen in the word which declared man's relation to the lower orders. In Eden man had governed by love and his own kingliness. With the loss of that kingliness resulting from his disobedience and rebellion, he had lost his true power of dominion, and that must now be exercised by fear and dread directly implanted by God in all the lower orders of life over which man was to rule.

Moreover, an alteration was made in the law of human interrelationship. A sterner rule than family discipline must be set up. Man must now hold the sword of justice, and himself insist on obedience. Another change concerned human sustenance. In addition to the green herb of the past, animal food was permitted under restrictions.

The earth was thus to be repeopled by a race living under new conditions, and at this point a new covenant between God and man came into force. Its terms reminded man that the promises of God are conditional.

A token of the covenant was chosen and established. God appropriated an existing wonder as the sign and seal thereof, the rainbow. The rainbow is born of light falling on raindrops and so is significant of judgment as related to love. Man was to look on this, remembering that God also was looking on it.

The chapter ends with the story of a startlingly sudden plunge into darkness. Noah is seen yielding to fleshly appetite. In the presence of the degradation of their father, the character of the sons was manifest. One, himself degraded, yielded to curiosity. Two, ashamed of the sin of their father, attempted to hide him. The cursing and blessing which fell from the lips of Noah were no capricious passing of sentences. Rather, they formed a clear statement of the tendency of character. The man in the grip of evil moved to slavery, while the man influenced by purity and love proceeded to government and blessing.

=== GENESIS 10 ===
Verses 1-32

In this chapter we have a simple and straightforward account of the dispersion of the sons of Noah and their families after the Flood. The descendants of Japheth moved toward the isles or the coastlands. The descendants of Ham moved toward the plains of Shinar and thence on. The descendants of Shem moved toward the hill country of the east.

It is not possible very clearly to define geographically today the districts occupied by various descendants of Noah.

What is clear, however, and to be carefully observed is that their movements were under a direct divine guidance, even though they may not have been conscious of it. Christian ethnologists still claim that all the races of today may be traced back to these revealed origins.

This chapter finds interpretation, in some measure, in the address of Paul on Mars' Hill in which he declared that God "made of one every nation of men to dwell on all the face of the earth, having determined their appointed seasons, and the bounds of their habitation."

=== GENESIS 11 ===
Verses 1-32

In this chapter we have the account of a human movement against dispersion. The movement was one of rebellion and was frustrated by divine interposition. The divine intention was the covering of the whole earth. The human action was in opposition to that, as men said, "Lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth."

This rebellious purpose was frustrated by the confusion of tongues. Necessarily belief in this story demands belief in the possibility of God's direct intervention in the affairs of men by what we sometimes speak of as supernatural methods. Any argument which is valid against the story of the confusion of tongues at Babel is equally valid against the account of the gift of tongues at Pentecost.

In this chapter we find the history narrowed. The lines of development through Ham and Japheth are omitted and the generations of Shem are given. This marks the selection of that branch of the race from which a man is to be chosen, out of whose loins a new nation is to spring, from which the great Deliverer will come.

In the last section of the chapter we have an account of the movement toward the adoption of a simple faith as the one law of life. Terah moved from Ur of the Chaldees. It is not stated that this was in response to a faith. The fact, however, that it was in the direction of the divine intention would suggest that it was so. Carefully observe these words, however, "And Terah . . . went forth . . . to go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there." It is the record of a start in a right direction which lacked persistence. Terah paused half way and dwelt at Haran until he died. The true man of faith is seen acting so far under the influence of his father; and bound by the earthly tie he abode with him in Haran.

=== GENESIS 13 ===
Verses 1-18

Thus, delivered by the divine intervention, Abram set his face again toward the line of the divine purpose and returned to Bethel. In this act is seen the victory of faith over failure.

It was at this crisis that the separation came between Abram and Lot. The occasion was strife between herdsmen, but the reason is to be found in the differing principles governing the lives of the two men. Abram was following God. Lot had been following Abram; and while in the deepest desire of his life he was loyal to God, the lack of direct communion seems to have resulted in clouding his vision and lowering his ideals. In the hour of crisis he made his own choice and it was the choice of a man attempting to compromise. The conflict of desire within him is seen in the phrases, 'like the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt." If these two things could be made contributory, then success was ensured by all the standards of human measurement.

Abram is seen in direct contrast to Lot in every way. Lot chose for himself. God chose for Abram. Lot chose by sight; "And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld." Abram, by faith, chose not to choose; and now Jehovah brought him into the place of sight on the basis of faith: "Lift up now thine eyes." Lot, having chose, obtained, and yet did not possess. Abram, trusting God, received from Him the title deeds to all the land, even including that which Lot had chosen for himself.

Abram immediately moved his tent and built his altar. In this connection the strength of faith is most clearly seen. Dependent on the promise of a seed to be as the dust of the earth, which at this time must have appeared to be contrary to all the probabilities of Nature, he took possession of the land by faith.

=== GENESIS 14 ===
Verses 1-24

In this chapter we see Lot and Abram in differing circumstances, resulting in the first case from personal choice, and in the second from the choice of God. Lot was involved in trouble through association. He had chosen his possession, pitched his tent toward Sodom, and finally moved into Sodom. Desiring Sodom's privileges, he had adopted Sodom's policy and had become a sharer in Sodom's peril. Abram, the man for whom God chose, was in the place of separation from peril and was living in quietness and prosperity.

Nevertheless, he went at once to the help of Lot and gained a complete victory over the kings opposing him. Notwithstanding this victory, Lot again moved back into Sodom and took up his abode there.

After the conflict with the kings, the man of faith was refreshed by the appearance of Melchizedek. Very remarkable is this appearance at this time. The only other references to Melchizedek are found in a psalm, and in a New Testament writing where he is named m his priesthood, a type of Christ.

Abram refused the reward which the king of Sodom offered. The blessing of Melchizedek had been all that his heart desired; and in refusing the rewards offered by the king of Sodom, he quoted the very words of Melchizedek, "God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth."

The lessons of this story are obvious.

In the case of Lot it is seen that the voice of God, disobeyed, becomes unheard, and the most startling circumstances fail to arouse the conscience. In the case of Abram it is seen that a right attitude toward God creates a right attitude toward all men. He was eager to help Lot, recognized the superiority of Melchizedek, and was quick to perceive the danger of receiving gifts from the king of Sodom.

=== GENESIS 15 ===
Verses 1-21

This is the account of the fourth direct appearance of Jehovah to Abram and evidently it had direct connection with what had immediately preceded. Abram had passed through two conflicts, the first with kings, the second with the suggestion of enrichment from the treasury of Sodom. In both he had been victorious. Now the divine voice declared, first, "I am thy shield," reminding him of how his victory over the kings had been obtained; while the second word, "I am . . . thy exceeding great reward" reminded him that he had lost nothing in refusing the reward offered by the king of Sodom.

In response to this word of God Abram's faith moved to a higher level. He was able to speak to God of the temptation to doubt which was in his heart. He was at once answered with the divine promise of an heir and was commanded to look at the stars to find the measure of the issue, "if thou be able to number them." Abram could not, but God could. So was his seed to be. Looking at the stars, he would know there was order where he could not discover it, number where he could not follow it; purpose where he could not trace it. He believed very literally; he built on God and God counted it to him for righteousness.

Jehovah now repeated the promise that he should inherit the land and in response to Abram's request gave him a sign. It was given in connection with sacrifice. In a horror of great darkness Abram received the revelation of trouble that lay ahead of his people and of an issue out of it. This, by the significant vision of a smoking furnace and a lamp. Abram's request for a sign was the request of faith. Therefore it was granted. When unbelief requests a sign, it is refused.

=== GENESIS 16 ===
Verses 1-16

The previous story makes it evident that the principle of faith is the true philosophy of life. It builds on God and is satisfied with Him. It thus becomes the source of all righteousness. Faith, therefore, is the highest activity of reason.

All this stands out in even more startling vividness by contrast in the story contained in this chapter. Here we have the account of the second deflection from faith in the conduct of Abram. It is a sad one and the issue of the failure continued through the following history. The failure of faith consisted in Abram attempting, at the instigation of Sarai, to further the purposes of God by human cleverness and contrivance. The seed was promised and when there appeared no likelihood of the promise being fulfilled on the human level, there was deflection from the divine line for raising seed through Hagar.

The harvest of this folly Abram began to reap almost immediately in the division of his own household and the bitterness that sprang up therein between Sarai and Hagar, and the ultimate flight of Hagar through Sarai's harsh dealing with her. The far-reaching result is found in the story of the posterity of Ishmael as a constant source of trouble to the posterity of Isaac. Where faith fails, evil is wrought, the issues of which are far-reaching.

There is a very beautiful part to this story, however, in the tenderness of God toward Hagar, the wronged one; and in her recognition of Him and consequent naming of the well in the wilderness by which she had in all probability sunk down exhausted. It was called "Beer-lahai-roi," that is, "The Well of the Living One who seeth Me."

=== GENESIS 17 ===
Verses 1-27

This chapter gives the account of the fifth appearance of God to Abram in which a divine covenant was made. At this point his name was changed from Abram, which means exalted father, to Abraham, which means, the father of a multitude. The change was significant, as it placed emphasis not upon the importance of the man, but upon the purpose of God through him. Here Jehovah announced Himself as El-Shaddai, the full meaning of which is God all-sufficient.

Abraham yielded himself to the revelation in adoring prostration and thus entered into a yet higher region of fellowship. It was now that the symbol of circumcision was appointed. This was to be an outward and visible sign of an inward and invisible relationship. It is well to remind ourselves that while this rite was indeed the sign of a spiritual relationship, it was by no means capricious and cruel but hygienic and beneficent. Medical science has now set its seal on the value of the rite.

At this point also the name of Sarai was changed to Sarah. The meaning of the old name is uncertain. The meaning of the new is Princess, in that she was to be the mother of nations. Abraham's laughter, unlike Sarah's later, was the laughter of gladness; and if the questions asked seem to suggest doubt, the fact of asking them on his face before God is evidence of the triumph of faith.

It was now that Abraham, in communion, gave expression to something that was evidently pulling at his heart. Ishmael was dear to him. The answer of God was not discipline, but the realization of a divine purpose. God is ever patient with us when the heart clings in affection to some method which is not His own. However, He never allows the man of faith to have his own way. There is a kindness which would be cruel. There is an apparent cruelty which is of the essence of kindness.

=== GENESIS 18 ===
Verses 1-33

This is the account of the sixth appearance of God to Abraham. In it four phases of relationship between God and Abraham are revealed. God visited Abraham and Abraham provided for Him. God bestowed on Abraham and Abraham received from Him. God communicated to Abraham and Abraham answered with the statement of a difficulty. God listened to Abraham and Abraham interceded with Him.

The picture of Abraham providing for the supernatural Visitors is beautiful in its revelation of his love and loyalty; but yet more in its manifestation of the grace of God.

Jehovah now communicated to Abraham His purpose concerning the cities of the Plain and His reasons for making this communication were stated. Abraham was the depository of blessing to the nations. It was fitting that his children should know the meaning of the destruction of Sodom.

Abraham found himself confronted with a difficulty which had to do with the strict justice of God; and his question, "shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" revealed his anxiety for the vindication of the character of God among the nations. The story of the intercession of Abraham with God on behalf of the cities, in the interest of the righteous, is a wonderful revelation of the patience of God. He will ever listen to honest intercession, though He knows His ways are infinitely better, than the fears that prompt our prayers. The sequel shows that in His action He goes beyond anything we ask. Abraham stopped at ten. Jehovah saved the two or three in whom there was any trace of recognition of Himself.

=== GENESIS 19 ===
Verses 1-38

Here the story of the visit of Jehovah and the angels is continued. Here we see the two angels coming to Lot. By this time Lot had attained to a position of eminence in Sodom. The phrase, "sitting in the gate," indicates that. The three Visitors sat and ate with Abraham. The two would hardly enter the dwelling of Lot. Whereas he was anxious to deliver them from the known wickedness of the citizens, it is evident how he had failed in the life of faith. The man who had attempted to compromise with principle is here seen hated of the world, having lost his personal peace, his testimony paralyzed, and utterly unable to influence his city toward righteousness.

The revelation of his failure is most clearly seen in his inability to influence his own family. Moreover, the deterioration of his own character is vividly portrayed. Here, in sight of judgment, he lingered and was saved only as angel hands laid hold on him and practically forced him forth.

The destruction of the cities of the Plain was due to corruption, following godless prosperity. Their cup of iniquity was full. Their unutterable pollution flamed forth in their attitude toward the supernatural Visitors. Over against this terrible failure of Lot, Abraham is seen as the man of faith. He had interceded for Sodom and now stood at the place where he met Jehovah, looking toward the cities of the Plain. Were his prayers unanswered? Nay, verily, for "God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow."

=== GENESIS 20 ===
Verses 1-18

Once again we have to face Abraham's deflection from faith. We see him journeying south to Gerar. This was the center of a race of men who, having driven out the original possessors of the land, were becoming more and more warlike, and were afterward to be known as the Philistines.

As Abraham approached, an old fear recurred and a former failure was repeated.

These deflections from faith in the life of Abraham did not occur in the great fundamental things, nor in the main essentials of his walk with God; but rather in the application of the principle of faith to the smaller details of life.

As we have said, this was the second time Abraham attempted by his own supposed cleverness to steer clear of a danger he feared; and once again, as in the former case, he ran on the very rocks he dreaded. The result was that the man who stood as a witness for Jehovah was seen by the heathen practicing deceit, and thus suffering the degradation of being censured by Abimelech, the heathen king.

Our deflections from faith occur most often through our failure to allow God to undertake in all the small matters of life. Some trivial business worry, or home difficulty, or personal danger, will drive us to acts that dishonor our Master. The highest activity of faith is that which completely confides in God, not only in crisis, but in the commonplaces of Me.

=== GENESIS 21 ===
Verses 1-34

At last in God's 'Set time," and in spite of all natural difficulties, the long-promised son was born. Sarah who at an earlier point had laughed with the laughter of incredulity, now laughed with the laughter of realization.

There is something vivid and startling, even, in the story of Ishmael. It was necessary that, because of an act of unbelief, the son should be cast out in order to carry out the divine purpose. Yet in this act the tenderness of God is revealed in that He "heard the voice of the lad," and sent an angel, promising that he also should become a great nation.

The principal value of the story is that of the part it plays in the history of Abraham. In spite of personal inclination and in simple obedience, he sent forth the child of the bond-woman and leaned back wholly and only on the divine provision for the fulfillment of the promise.

The chapter closes with the account of the covenant made with Abimelech. This covenant was based on Abimelech's clear recognition of the fact that God was with Abraham. Notwithstanding the previous failure of Abraham's faith, which had brought about Abimelech's rebuke, the deeper fact of the existence of his faith had influenced this man and did bring him into covenant relationship with God through Abraham. As the story is written, there seems to be no reason to think that in this covenant made on the basis of the recognition of God there was anything contrary to the purpose of God. I prefer to think of it as revealing the influence that might have been growingly exerted by the people of faith had they been true to God.

=== GENESIS 23 ===
Verses 1-20

We now see Abraham in the midst of personal sorrow, which reveals his character in a remarkable way.

Sarah, who had ever been to him a princess, was now taken from his side, which meant the loss of the strongest human prop to Abraham's faith. It must be remembered that she had been with him along the whole pathway of obedience from Ur of the Chaldees. She had shared his hours of darkness and his hours of light. Doubtless at times she had been a cause of fear and trembling to him, and his very love for her had brought him to some deflections from faith. But far more often her comradeship had strengthened him.

When she died, Abraham is seen in his action as a man full of the dignity that comes from faith. He was first of all a mourner, shedding the tears which expressed the sorrow and loneliness of his life. Faith never kills affection, and the man was keenly alive to the loss he had sustained.

Yet faith never allows sorrow to overwhelm. He "rose up from before his dead." His next action was definitely one of faith. He did not take Sarah to Ur, but buried her in the land which God had given to him. That faith operated, moreover, in the method he now followed. He was willing to receive the land as a gift from God, but would not receive part of God's gift as a gift from the sons of Heth. Abraham's first actual possession in the land, therefore, was a grave. This in itself is a teaching and a prophecy. God begins where man ends. The sorrows of life reveal a man's true character as perhaps nothing else can. Faith weeps beside the dead and then moves on to fulfillment of duty as it puts a check on sorrow. Faith takes hold of earth's greatest despair, death, and makes it the occasion of a possession which holds within itself all the future.

=== GENESIS 24 ===
Verses 1-67

This chapter is complete in itself and is a perfect idyll. Abraham was well stricken in years. Sarah was dead. Isaac, the son of Abraham, was still unmarried. In the interest of the divine program Isaac must not marry a Canaanite nor go back to find a bride among the people who had been left behind. Thus Eliezer was sent to seek a bride among his own kindred. Of course, the story is Eastern, and gives the account of how the quest was undertaken and rewarded.

In this story Laban appears and his masterfulness is manifest in the way he acted as host in the house of his father. Rebekah's consent to go showed her responding to the divine purpose and her willingness to move forward along the divine pathway.

The story of the woman going the long distance toward her new home, and of Isaac, the man of quiet, passive faith, meditating in the field at eventide, is picturesque and full of beauty. Apart from these details of the faraway land, we have here a beautiful picture of an ideal marriage. It is the union of a man and woman on the basis of identity in principle. By faith Isaac waited and by faith Rebekah obeyed. It is, moreover, the union of opposites. In Rebekah faith was adventurous and bold. In Isaac faith was retiring and meek. The two lives were made one on the basis of response to a common principle. Two natures utterly different, yet complementing each other, were united for the fullilment of a divine purpose. In the story of these two as it proceeds we shall come across failure on both sides, but here the shadows have not gathered, and the faith of Abraham is rewarded in the union of his son, a man of passive faith, with Rebekah, a woman whose faith is adventuresome and bold.

=== GENESIS 25 ===
Verses 1-34

The record of the death of Abraham is full of beauty. His life had been spent in the realm of the supernatural, the region of vision, the power of the spiritual. The whole of it is summed up in the words which declared that he died, "an old man, and full." His life was satisfied and rounded out to completion. He had started out to find a land and to found a nation. He died with no possession but a grave, and no sight of his posterity other than his son Isaac and his grandsons Esau and Jacob. Yet he died "full," that is, satisfied.

In this chapter begins the section dealing more especially with the life of Isaac. Two divine appearances are recorded as having been granted to him and in each case they were for ratification. His faith was ever passive rather than active and produced rest rather than initiation.

In the account of the birth of Esau and Jacob the brothers are placed in strong contrast; the first wild and romantic; the second, as the margin reads, "harmless" or "perfect," a dweller in tents. This is an interesting statement at the beginning of a story in which so much will be seen of Jacob that is mean and contemptible. Here, however, is the truth concerning him.

Degeneration in the character of Isaac is evidently marked in the statement that his love for Esau was caused by his eating Esau's venison. Neither Esau nor Jacob is to be admired. The one, profane, allowing the lower side of his nature to master him, sold his birthright to appease physical hunger; the other took advantage of that hunger to obtain the birthright.

=== GENESIS 26 ===
Verses 1-35

We have here the account of the first direct divine communication of Jehovah to Isaac. It came in a time of difficulty such as that which had caused his father to go down into Egypt. Warned against repeating that folly, he was thus saved from making his father's mistake. Strangely enough, however, he repeated the folly of his father in Gerar in connection with Abimelech. The story reminds us that there is no richer inheritance into which a man can enter than a godly parentage, but that, after all, every man has to fight his own battles and work out his own salvation.

The quiet patience of Isaac is manifested in the matter of the wells. He first proceeded to dig again the wells of his father Abraham. His servants then dug a new well, for which the Philistine herdsmen contended, and he called it Esek, that is, Contention. Still persevering, they dug another and this was followed by further strife. This well Isaac named Sitnah, which means enmity. Again they dug and no contention followed. All this was the calm persistence of faith.

Returning from Gerar to Beersheba, Jehovah made His second direct communication to Isaac. It would seem as though this communication followed Isaac's return to his own proper place. It was of the nature of the ratification of the covenant, and Isaac at once responded in a way which indicated his fidelity in heart to the principle of faith. He built an altar and pitched a tent. This action was followed by a visit from Abimelech and a covenant between him and Isaac very similar to that made between Abraham and Abimelech.

In the story we see how faith operates in the case of such quieter and less adventurous natures.

=== GENESIS 27 ===
Verses 1-46

From this point the history passes to center largely around Jacob. At the beginning, four persons stand out: Isaac, Rebekah, Esau, and Jacob, and not one of them is admirable. Isaac is even more degenerate in his devotion to the physical. Rebekah knows the purpose of God but is not content to wait. Esau is still the same, a man of physical strength, completely centered therein. Jacob is weak as he yields to the suggestion of his mother.

Over the whole is seen the activity of the divine government, overruling deceit and duplicity, so that the purpose of the divine counsel moves forward. Isaac, when the facts are discovered, was seized with a strange trembling, born assuredly of his sense of the ovemling majesty of God. The trembling led to the action of faith in which he refused to interfere in the matter of the blessing which he had pronounced unwittingly on Jacob.

Esau's natural reaction was hatred for Jacob, which created anxiety in the mind of Rebekah, and she began to arrange to send Jacob out of the reach of danger.

In all probability Rebekah never saw Jacob again. Her plan was that he should tarry with Laban a few days only, and she distinctly declared her intention to send for him again. But she never did.

=== GENESIS 28 ===
Verses 1-22

Here Jacob is seen exiled from his home, flying from Beersheba. In this connection we have the account of the first of the direct divine communications to him. Tired and weary, he reached Luz and during a dream he had a vision which suggested communication between heaven and earth. What impressed Jacob, however, seems not to have been that part of the vision, but the fact that Jehovah was there in that distant place and that He spoke to him. On waking, Jacob declared his new consciousness of the presence of God. It is not to be wondered at that such a revelation filled him with a sense of awe as he cried, "How dreadful is this place."

On the following morning he showed the two sides of his nature. His deep religious conviction and faith were indicated by the erection of a stone and naming the place Beth-el, the House of God. His restless activity was manifested in the bargaining spirit in which he expressed himself. In the vision of the night God had promised to be with him and now he says that if that will be so, he will give a tenth of all he possesses to God.

That is faith but on a low level. Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that the memory of the midnight vision remained with him through all the coming days. It is evident that by this appearance he was arrested, and the spirit of his coming to the house of Laban was changed.

=== GENESIS 29 ===
Verses 1-35

Pursuing his journey after his experience at Luz, now called Beth-el, Jacob came into "the land of the children of the east." Here the next twenty years of his life were to be spent, during which he amassed his wealth. As presently he himself said, he went out carrying only his staff: "With my staff I passed over this Jordan" ( Gen 32:10 ). When he returned, he was wealthy, as his words, again interpreted by the time and place, reveal, ". . . and now I am become two companies."

At this point the story of his dealings with Laban commences. On the human side it is a fascinating account of the conflict of two strong, astute men. There is really little to admire in the methods of either. However, of the two, as we shall see, Laban was the more to be despised. Here, too, we have the beginning of the story of the one great human love in the life of Jacob, the story of his meeting with and eventual winning of Rachel. There is no doubt that it is a pure love story, and all the subsequent history shows how dear to the heart of Jacob was this woman of pastoral life, the shepherdess of her father's sheep.

Laban met Jacob with effusive greetings, and, with the shrewdness that characterized him, there can be no doubt he saw how much he might gain from the services of Jacob. This accounts for the readiness with which he promised him Rachel to wife. The true nature of the man, however, was clearly manifested in the brutal deceit he practiced on Jacob at the end of the seven years. Love, however, is stronger than all opposition and Jacob served Laban another seven years for Rachel. It may be pointed out that he did not wait those seven years, for they were united at once. Nevertheless, he carried out the terms of the bargain.

=== GENESIS 30 ===
Verses 1-43

In reading these stories we must never forget that we are looking at things as they were in that far-gone time and must make all necessary allowances for the imperfect light in which these people lived. That, however, does not prevent our seeing how much is chronicled here which contradicts the principle of faith. It is the story of domestic trouble and heart-burning out of which arose actions utterly out of keeping with the life of simple trust. Nevertheless, throughout there is a manifest consciousness of the divine overruling. The interpretation of that government is often at fault, as when Rachel imagined that the son born to Bilhah was in any sense an answer to prayer. That answer came with the birth of Joseph.

At the birth of Joseph, Jacob attempted to break from Laban. Laban, however, realized that Jacob's coming and sojourn with him had brought him great gain; and for pure selfishness he was anxious to retain him. Thus a new compact was entered into between them.

Laban at once attempted to make impossible the enrichment of Jacob by setting three days' journey between the cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted, and the rest, giving the former into the hands of his sons, and the latter into the hands of Jacob. It was an attempt to frustrate the possibility of Jacob's gaining anything from the compact. The sequel shows that he had underestimated the shrewdness of his nephew.

Neither side acted admirably; but watching the movement between two schemers, it is impossible to avoid a feeling of satisfaction that Jacob was one too many for Laban. Comparing Jacob with Abraham, however, one sees how much lower was the level of his faith. Abraham had been content to let the scheming Lot choose. Jacob, always believing in God, nevertheless was not able to commit these matters of worldly possession to Him.

=== GENESIS 31 ===
Verses 1-55

In the midst of Jacob's success the second divine communication came to him, commanding him to return to the land of his fathers and giving him the promise, "I will be with thee." Thus, after at least twenty years' absence, he set his face again toward home. The same cunning which had been manifested throughout is seen in the stealth with which he broke away from Laban.

Much may happen in twenty years. However, one thing can never happen. The wrongdoing of the past cannot be undone and Jacob started for home with fear, for Esau his brother was yet alive. Nevertheless, the call of God was supreme to him and he went obediently.

Rachel practiced deceit in that she stole the teraphim of her father. This led to one more meeting between Laban and Jacob. After heated controversy, they separated, having erected a stone or a heap and named it Mizpah. It was the symbol of suspicion and called on God to watch between them. It is really a sad spectacle of two men calling on God, not to ratify their comradeship, but to watch over them on behalf of each other in order that neither may wrong the other. The account of the connection between these two men has been full of interest, but its final message is that selfish partnership invariably issues in suspicion and separation.

=== GENESIS 32 ===
Verses 1-32

This is unquestionably one of the great chapters of the Bible, and it is significant how constant and powerful is its appeal to all who live on the principle of faith. It gives the account of the third direct communication of God to Jacob.

As he returned to his own land, the same conflicting principles which have been evident throughout are still manifest. His going at all was in direct obedience to the distinct command of God. There was really no other reason to return. He might still have stayed with Laban and outwitted him for his own enrichment. Nevertheless, the manner of his going was characterized by independence and confidence in his own ability. This is seen in the account of the elaborate and carefully calculated preparation he made for meeting Esau. He was ready to placate Esau with presents, and prepared a list of them. However, they were to be used only if Esau was hostile.

This coming back into the land was an event of great importance which Jacob seems to have recognized. When all his own arrangements were made he voluntarily stayed behind and went down to the Jabbok, quite evidently for some dealing with God. Then and there, in the quiet and stillness of the night, God met with him in the form of a man. Wrestling with him, God demonstrated his weakness to Jacob, finally appealing to his spiritual consciousness by crippling him in his body. This is certainly a story of Jacob's victory, but it was a victory won when, conscious of a superior power, he yielded and, with strong crying and tears, out of weakness was made strong. Jacob's limp was a lifelong disability, but it was also the patent of his nobility.

=== GENESIS 33 ===
Verses 1-20

The morning broke and Jacob-or Israel as he had now become- went forward to meet Esau. How strange a mixture there was in the make-up of this man is once more clearly evident. It is patent that fear of his brother still lurked in his heart and there is a touch of nobleness in his going forward alone to meet him, having set his loved ones behind in two companies. Moreover, his love of Rachel is again manifest as he put her in the second company, so that if Esau met him in anger she, at any rate, might have a better chance to escape

The chief interest of this story, however, is found in Esau's attitude. In him Jacob met no angry man but a brother. It would appear that Esau had started to meet Jacob with revenge in his heart, as the armed bands suggest. But God has the disposing of all hearts in His own power; and while He had been dealing with Jacob by the brook, probably all unconsciously to Esau, He had been dealing with him too, changing his attitude toward Jacob.

The measure of a man's finding God is ever that of his discovery of a pathway straitened and yet smoothed. Evidently, all Jacob's preparations to appease Esau would have been of no avail, for Esau did not want them. But God had met and dealt with the difficulty for this man who had been brought into submission to Him in the long struggle of the lonely night.

=== GENESIS 34 ===
Verses 1-31

When Jacob parted from Esau he should have gone directly to Beth-el. The previous chapter shows that he did not do so but tarried at Shechem. Unquestionably, this was a mistake. There is nothing more perilous than to stay anywhere short of the place to which God is calling, and here we have the account of the sad and tragic reaping from this halt. It gives the story of a defiled daughter and of sons using the instruments of cruelty for vengeance. It is a startling revelation of how the fruits of a man's disobedience may be gathered in the history of his family. How often children have been harmed incalculably, because parents, while believing in God, have tamed at some Shechem of worldly advantage instead of centering life around Beth-el and the altar!

Jacob's complaint to Simeon and Levi was utterly unworthy of a man of faith. It breathed the spirit of selfish fear from first to last. There was no word of jealousy for the honor of God, or of appreciation of the necessity for the purity of the chosen seed. It is wholly indicative of a cowardly fear for himself. The moment faith ceases to be the simple principle of life, selfishness is enthroned; and, instead of the calm courage which is ever the result of obedient faith, there ensues the cowardly fear of personal suffering.

=== GENESIS 35 ===
Verses 1-29

God never abandons His children to the forces of evil circumstances resulting from their own folly. The fourth direct communication to Jacob was that which called him back to Beth-el. Again the evidence of his faith in God is found in the fact that his response was immediate. Moreover, its genuineness is evidenced by his destruction of the foreign gods, the quick movement to Beth-el, and the immediate erection there of an altar.

This obedience was followed immediately by the fifth divine communication; only the name Israel was again pronounced. It would seem almost as though Jacob had not entered into the experience of the blessing won by the Jabbok until now. In that night the vision had come to him, and his crippling was evidence of the reality of the divine action. All this, however, had not been translated into victory in the details of his life.

How often this is so. In some great crisis of revelation a larger life is seen, its laws appreciated, and its claims intellectually yielded to. Yet it is not wrought out into the details of life, and so oftentimes its greatest value is gained only through some subsequent experience of failure.

In this fifth of God's direct appearances to Jacob, God not only again declared the new name of the man, but gave him His own name with a new significance. It was the name El-Shaddai, which He had first used to Abraham on the occasion when his name was changed from Abram to Abraham. Its supreme value is its declaration of the all-sufficiency of God.

In this chapter we have also the account of the sorrows following on this experience: the death of Rachel, the sin of Reuben, the death of Isaac. All which things played their part in the final making of the man.

=== GENESIS 36 ===
Verses 1-43

This is one of the sections of the biblical literature which all of us are tempted to hurry over, because it appears to be almost exclusively a list of names. We may allow that it appears uninteresting, nevertheless it is of great importance, having a very definite place and value in the highways of history.

The story of the prolific progeny of "that profane person Esau" is at once startling and solemn. The sons of the flesh would seem to have multiplied far faster than the seed of promise. The relationship between these two lines is revealed in a brief and pregnant sentence in the first verse, "Esau . . . is Edom," which is repeated in verse 19, and the fact is emphasized in the closing statement, "This is Esau, the father of the Edomites." These references are evidently intended to draw attention to the origins of the people who through long centuries were antagonistic to Israel.

Though, personally, Jacob escaped the anger of his brother, the harvests resulting from his deceit were reaped in after years. These harvests of the centuries are full of suggestiveness. They reveal the awful and stupendous greatness of life. The deed of good or evil, of truth or falsehood, done today is not ended, though it is done. There is indeed nothing small.

=== GENESIS 38 ===
Verses 1-30

The sad and tragic story of Judah's corruption recorded here needs very little comment. It carries its own lessons of the frailty of human nature and of the far-reaching effects of sin.

However, placing it at this point in the history is suggestive and important. Following this revelation, we are observing the first movements of God in the process of regeneration amid the degeneration of the race. So far, we have been occupied almost exclusively with individuals. Gradually the larger outlook on the family and society emerges into view. The conditions which made possible Judah's sin, and the sin in itself, revealed the necessity for another new departure. A marked tendency toward the corruption of the chosen people by unhallowed intercourse with the people of the land was apparent. Had there been no divine over-ruling and had these people been left to themselves, the chosen seed would have inevitably been utterly corrupted and the purposes of God defeated.

While Judah was thus sinning, Joseph was already in Egypt, and so the segregation of the chosen people for a long period was already being prepared by keeping them separate from other people and by the rigid exclusiveness of the Egyptians.

=== GENESIS 39 ===
Verses 1-23

Here begins the story of Joseph in Egypt which is so full of interest. Through the malice of his brethren he had been sold into slavery and in such condition we now see him. Here, at the very beginning of the story of his life and work in Egypt, we learn the secret of all his wonderful success, "Jehovah was with him." and also that, "His master saw that Jehovah was with him."

In those two statements is revealed a man in circumstances which always have been calculated to degrade. He was a slave. Nevertheless, in these very circumstances he so lived as to demonstrate to his master that he was a man having communion with God. Potiphar's conviction resulted in Joseph's promotion.

While it is true that godly men must suffer persecution sooner or later, it is equally true that the life of simple godliness commands the respect and trust even of ungodly men.

Then follows the story of his temptation, a temptation subtle and fierce, presenting itself as it did in the person of one who was supposed to be infinitely Joseph's superior in social position. His quiet and heroic victory bears testimony to the strength of the man who lives with God habitually, even under circumstances of temptation, which are at once subtle and sudden and strong.

Once more his circumstances were changed, and he was a prisoner; and again it is declared, "Jehovah was with him"; and the fact was manifest with practically the same result of promotion to a position of trust. The chapter reveals the fidelity of God to a man who was loyal to Him. Whether in slavery or in prison, in prosperity or adversity, Jehovah was still with Joseph and he was triumphant.

=== GENESIS 40 ===
Verses 1-23

The works of God are ever characterized by simplicity. No study is more fascinating in the Divine Oracles or in human experience than the wonderful mosaic of the divine government. If it may be stated reverently, it 'would seem as though there are no forces or facts on which God does not lay His hand in quiet strength and majesty and make them tributary to the accomplishment of His purpose.

He now worked certainly through the uncertain method of dreams. Prisoners, and Pharaoh, as we shall presently see, were troubled in the night and through such troubling God proceeded in carrying out His designs. When the butler and the baker dreamed and told their dreams to Joseph, he is revealed as a man still dependent on God, declaring that the interpretation of dreams belongs to Him.

There is a human touch in Joseph's request to the butler, "Have me in thy remembrance." He was conscious of the limitation of his life and evidently sighed for liberty as does every healthy man.

There is another human touch, and as natural but sad, in the words, "the . . . butler . . . forgat him." It is good to remember that God did not forget him.

=== GENESIS 41 ===
Verses 1-57

Still the divine activity proceeded. Now it was Pharaoh who dreamed, and now the butler remembered. The result was that Joseph was brought before the king, and as he stood in the royal presence he was still the same man, dependent on God and proclaiming his dependence. In answer to the king's declaration that he had heard of his power to interpret dreams, Joseph said, "it is not in me: God will give Pharaoh an answer of peace." He then proceeded to interpret Pharaoh's dreams. The result was that Pharaoh recognized in him "a man in whom the Spirit of God is," and again Joseph was promoted.

It is well to note this repetition. In slavery, in prison, at the court of the king, Jehovah was with His servant. The fact was recognized in turn by Potiphar, the chief keeper, and by Pharaoh. In each case Joseph was placed in power, in the house of his master, in the prison of his confinement, and in the realm of the king. True godliness will manifest itself and it always commands respect.

Thus the great regenerative movement of God proceeded and things are seen developing toward accomplishment of the divine purpose. One of the chief values of these Old Testament histories is the revelation of these facts. Moreover, this is not merely the story of a condition of affairs that existed long ago. It still exists. In the movements of our age a divine purpose is being wrought out through human history, even though we may not detect it.

=== GENESIS 42 ===
Verses 1-38

According to the foretelling of Joseph in interpreting Pharaoh's dreams, the famine came; but through Joseph's executive ability Egypt was provided with corn sufficient not only for its own needs, but equal to the need of other peoples.

At last Joseph's brethren are seen fulfilling his dream of long ago and bowing down in his presence. His conversation with them is revealing. Questioned about themselves, they replied, 'We . . . are twelve brethren . . . and one is not." These men were evidently conscious of their guilt. It would seem the memory of the wrong done to their brother long ago had haunted them through the years, recurring with new force in this hour of danger. While their action was utterly evil, yet they referred to their "brother." Though they had no consciousness that the Egyptian governor was their brother, the memory of the sin of long ago sprang up when they found themselves in peril.

When they returned to him without Simeon and communicated the demand of the governor that Benjamin should be brought to him, Jacob's complaint was full of sadness. The old man said, "All these things are against me.' It was not the language of faith, and yet surely none of us can criticize him, for the outlook was dark enough. Had he been a man of less subtle faith, perchance he might have been able to say, "All things work together for good."

Though he was not able to say this, the fact remains that the things which seemed to be against him were really working together to give him back his long-lost boy and to carry toward completion those gracious purposes for which he and his father stood. As we study the story we may surely learn the lesson that it is never wise to measure the facts of any hour by the limits of our own vision.

=== GENESIS 43 ===
Verses 1-34

All the old characteristics of Jacob are manifest in this account of his proposed method of dealing with the governor of Egypt with whom his sons had had to do. If things were against him, he did not lose confidence in his own ability to manipulate them to his own advantage. He would send a present and so appease the man.

In this action Jacob unconsciously revealed himself. It was his perpetual method of attempting to deal with other men. Always he seems to have thought that the great end of all men was to gain something, and so he imagined that the Egyptian ruler might be bribed into complacency. It is often so that we reveal ourselves in our estimates of others.

The picture of Joseph here is full of beauty. In the sense of worldly power he was now a great man. His position was one of national and even international power and influence. Notwithstanding this, the springs of true life were not dried up. His emotional nature was still quick and active. This is another evidence that he was living in fellowship with God? In some senses the perils of powerful position are subtler and graver than those of slavery and prison. Too often advancement and the ease and luxurious circumstances attendant on it serve to deaden the finer emotions of the soul. Even in such circumstances, however, a man is safe if Jehovah is with him. The rush of emotion which drove Joseph into secrecy for weeping is as sure an evidence of his true greatness as the statesmanlike qualities which had served him in the administration of the affairs of Egypt.

=== GENESIS 44 ===
Verses 1-34

Occasionally, criticism of Joseph's action in placing the money and his cup in the sacks of his brethren has been made. To put the matter in the mildest form, surely such criticism reveals a lack of humor. The story is really most natural and beautiful. Such methods are best tested by their ultimate meaning and results. Joseph was preparing for a dramatic ending. One can imagine his quiet enjoyment of the difficulties of his brethren as he played this trick on them. It was a trick which could have been suggested only to a man who still had the heart of a boy. He was arranging for the moment when he would reveal himself and be able to pour out on them all the pent-up love of his heart.

Nobleness and beauty mark Judah's attitude and plea on behalf of his father. Evidently, back of his moving appeal was a keen consciousness of the sin of the past, and, so far as possible, a desire to atone or at least to prevent any further darkening of the last days of the old man. With splendid devotion to this high purpose, Judah asked to be allowed to take the place of Benjamin in the mouth of whose sack the governor's cup had been found.

=== GENESIS 45 ===
Verses 1-28

In the account of Joseph's revelation of himself to his brethren, the chief value is in his recognition of the fact that his destiny had been in the hand of God: "It was not you that sent me hither, but God." This capacity for ignoring secondary causes is one of the surest signs of greatness. So it was that Joseph was able to forget and to forgive his brethren for selling him into slavery. It is a consciousness possible only to the life of habitual communion with God.

The important position Joseph occupied in Egypt is clearly seen in Pharaoh's attitude toward Joseph's father and his brothers.

When Jacob heard that his son was alive, his heart was touched to its depth: "It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before I die." Thus he was beginning to find out that under the government of his covenant-keeping God the things he had declared to be against him were really for him. How good it is that when our faith wavers, God does not change His mind or purpose for us. He moves right on in infinite love toward the final good. How much feverish unrest we would be spared if only we would learn from these stories of the past to repose our confidence in God rather than in circumstance and quietly await His time.

=== GENESIS 46 ===
Verses 1-34

This chapter should be read in the light of the whole divine movement we are attempting to keep in mind. The migration of Jacob and his sons to Egypt is here distinctly shown to be a part of God's program. At this juncture God appeared and charged him not to be afraid, making him a threefold promise. First, that He would make a great nation of him there, that is, in Egypt. How much lay concealed in that word Jacob perhaps did not understand. In all probability he understood the promise to mean great in numbers. That it had such intention there can be no doubt, but subsequent history shows that it meant far more, for through discipline and suffering the nation was to be made great in other ways than population increase. God reveals to men at any given time only so much as they are able to bear. And yet in case any fear should come to the heart of His servant, He promised him, second, "I will go down with thee"; and, finally, "I will . . . bring thee up." It is interesting to note that God still spoke to him by the old name "Jacob" recognizing that he had not experimentally entered into all that grace had provided for him, and indicating that notwithstanding his failure, God still continued to guide.

Joseph carefully arranged for the segregation of his people which was also undoubtedly part of the divine purpose. He charged them to declare themselves to Pharaoh as shepherds. That ensured the maintenance of the separation of the Egyptians from the Hebrews because "every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians."

=== GENESIS 47 ===
Verses 1-31

To watch Jacob is to see a man who alternated between faith and fear. Standing before Pharaoh, his faith in God and his consciousness of his own position in the divine economy were clearly apparent. The less is ever blessed of the greater, and when Jacob gave his blessing to Pharaoh it was undoubtedly with a consciousness of his own relation to a divine program.

Joseph's policy in administering Egyptian affairs must be judged by the times in which he lived. It was a policy which ensured the interests of the king, of the nation, and of the people. It was one of unification and consolidation. So far as Israel was concerned, his action precluded the possibility of their harassment by petty princes. It is equally true that by this very action Joseph made possible what subsequently happened, the enslavement of the whole people by the will of the supreme Pharaoh. Here again the hand of God is seen operating through the Egyptian policy for the immediate safety of His people and then for the discipline and suffering through which they were to pass.

The interchange of names in this story is arresting. Referring to the man, it is said that "Jacob lived in the land of Egypt"; but when referring to his departure, he is called "Israel"; Jacob, in himself; Israel, in the government of God. The writer of the letter to the Hebrews speaks of his faith as manifest only when dying he blessed his sons and worshiped, and even then speaks of him as "Jacob." In the end of this narrative his faith and fear are manifest: his faith, in that he chose to be buried with his fathers; his fear, in that he made Joseph swear so to bury him.

=== GENESIS 48 ===
Verses 1-22

The use of the two names is observed once more. Jacob was sick, but, hearing that Joseph was coming to see him, it was Israel that strengthened himself. Once again Jacob was the speaker and in what he said the planning of the schemer was still evident.

Yet how wonderfully the divine overruling is seen, for in Jacob's adoption of Ephraim and Manasseh the redemption of Joseph from Egypt was brought about. Joseph had married an Egyptian woman and occupied a place of peculiar power in Egypt. What more likely than that his sons should be brought up as Egyptians? The action of Jacob in claiming these boys as his retained the succession of Joseph within the border of the people of God.

In the latter part of the story the name is Israel and the whole life of the man was one of faith. Evidently he acted entirely under divine impulse in crossing his hands so that the right lay on Ephraim's head and the left on Manasseh. Thus it is seen that notwithstanding all his faults and failures, this son of Isaac and Abraham was indeed a man of faith and an instrument through whom it was possible for God to carry out His purposes.

=== GENESIS 49 ===
Verses 1-33

Before his passing, Jacob, in forecasting the future of his sons, based what he had to say on what he had already seen in them. In some cases the allusions are difficult to follow, and the connection is not easy to see. In others both are unmistakable.

Speaking of Reuben, Jacob declared that pre-eminence of privilege does lot necessarily issue in pre-eminence of position. Of Simeon and Levi he declared that cruelty of character ever issues in division and scattering. In Judah he saw the shining of the central hope of himself and Israel. In Zebulun he saw all commercial supremacy and in Issachar the method of the diplomat bending to service in order to secure quietness. Dan, cunning and keen, was to exercise judgeship. Gad, the warlike, Asher, the luxurious, and Naphtali are all referred to.

Most tender and beautiful were Jacob's references to Joseph. He was a fruitful bough, which indicated his realization of possibility. Moreover, his branches were to run over the wall, thus exceeding the bounds of expectation. He was to know persecution but to abide in strength, and the most abundant blessings were pronounced on him. Benjamin was dismissed briefly as characterized by cunning and fierceness.

Then follows the story of Jacob's death, his last charge to his sons being that he should be buried among his own people.

=== GENESIS 50 ===
Verses 1-26

Here we have a strange and wonderful sight. Jacob was buried with Egyptian pomp, yet in the land of promise. Thus, at last, after a career checkered from the beginning, Jacob entered into his rest. The study of his life reveals little to his own credit, but much to the strength of the grace of God. Nevertheless the activity of that principle of faith which is ever the basis of divine operation was revealed throughout. Well for us if from the story we learn to avoid his mistakes.

Jacob being dead and buried, Joseph's brethren were afraid. How little they knew their brother's heart. Again, with splendid magnanimity, he triumphed over their fear when he said to them, 'Ye meant evil against me; but God meant it for good." It is always the prerogative of one whose life is lived in close relationship with God to be magnanimous toward those who, while attempting to harm him, do, nevertheless, carry out the divine intention of blessing.

At length, Joseph came to his last hour, declaring his confidence that his people would ultimately return to the God-appointed land, and charging them that in the day of their going they should take his bones with them.

Thus ends the Book of Genesis. It is a story of beginnings and not of completions. That which commenced with the majestic phrase, "In the beginning God," ends with the equally suggestive phrase, "a coffin in Egypt." Genesis demands a way out of Egypt for that coffin or else the faith of the man whose bones rest therein was of no effect. The name of the next Book is in itself an answer-Exodus.

